Issue Date: March 9, 2022 

Deadline for Questions: March 24, 2022, 10:00 AM Tbilisi Time 

Closing Date: April 8, 2022 

Closing Time: 10:00 AM Tbilisi Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72011422RFA00003 

 

Program Title: USAID Media Program 

 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the USAID Media Program. 
Eligibility for this award is not restricted. See Section C of this Notice of Funding Opportunity 
(NOFO) for eligibility requirements. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO, subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 


Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted 
at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

Robert Claussen 

Supervisory Contracting and Agreement Officer 

USAID/Georgia

 

 

 

 

 

 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description 

 

 

Section B – Federal Award Information 

 

 

Section C – Eligibility Information 

 

 

Section D – Application and Submission Information 

 

 

Section E – Application Review Information 

 

 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information 

 

 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 

 

 

Section H – Other Information 

 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

 

1. PURPOSE 

 

The purpose of the USAID Media Program is to strengthen the quality of media and information 
in Georgia while preserving an information landscape that is vital to Georgia’s citizens and holds 
Georgia’s government to account. USAID defines quality as well-researched, evidence-based 
content that adheres to journalistic ethics and is civically relevant and engaging. To achieve this 
vision of success, the activity will work toward the following objectives: 

 

Objective 1: Preserve and strengthen an enabling environment that fosters press freedom and 
access to information; 

Objective 2: Develop more effective self-regulation among media professionals and information 
producers that sets standards for quality and ethics; and 

Objective 3: Increase the availability of civically relevant, fact-based, independent sources of 
information. 

 

This activity will advance key USAID/Georgia priorities, including advancing democracy, human 
rights, and governance goals; promoting transparent, citizen-responsive governance and 
democratic norms and institutions; and engaging with Georgian civic movements to hold the 
Georgian government accountable for commitments while building demand for responsive 
governance, as noted in the USAID/Georgia Country Development Cooperation Strategy 2020-
2025.1 

1 Country Development and Cooperation Strategy -- Georgia 2020-2025 

 

This activity will differ from previous USAID investments in media in the following ways: 

 

Preserving the space for independent journalism, media freedom, and journalist safety: As 
indicators for media freedom in Georgia are in decline, this activity will preserve the enabling 
environment for media and freedom of expression, maintaining hard-won gains by democratic 
actors, and improving upon them where possible. Given the current state of the sector in Georgia 
– specifically, the threats to journalists and the quality of journalism, backsliding in the enabling 
environment, and diminished adherence to professional standards – USAID expects a high level 
of effort on Objectives 1 and 2. The activity will work through existing organizations, institutions, 
and/or coalitions to address gaps in the existing system to achieve objectives. 

 


Supporting fact-based, civically relevant content regardless of platform: This activity will 
take an expansive view of the information and media landscape that goes beyond traditional 
media institutions. The activity aims to support sources that citizens are turning to for news and 
information. Georgia’s information sector is evolving and contains a range of players. This 
activity will support fact-based, civically relevant and engaging content offerings regardless of 
platform. The activity will work with start-ups, online influencers, investigative reporters, and/or 
teams within a (traditional) media outlet working on content that resonates in the public 
discussion and delivers impact. This approach is distinct from traditional support to established 
independent media outlets, and will assume some level of programmatic risk by investing in new 
players and encouraging experimentation. 

 

Building “Communities of Action”: The activity will support the growing convergence of 
media and civil society. It will work with media actors that provide information that resonates 
with citizens’ concerns and that catalyze active community engagement of citizens to help them 
hold to account the institutions that are failing them. The potential for the media to contribute to 
democratic development is articulated in the Mission Statement of 2021 Nobel Laureate Maria 
Ressa’s publication Rappler: “Through cutting-edge stories, conversations, and collaboration, we 
aim to speak truth to power and build communities of action for a better world.”2 This notion 
articulates journalism’s ability to nourish “communities of action” by providing citizens with 
data, facts, and information that inform public discussion about important issues. 

2 
Rappler: Mission Statement 

 

New Implementation Approaches must include: 

● More experimentation and innovation: to pilot and scale promising initiatives; 
● Proactive, creative approaches: to foster how media and civil society can converge to 
catalyze community engagement; 
● Networking of actors and efforts: to increase coordination, collaboration, and 
cooperation within and between the media and CSO sectors to maximize advocacy efforts. 


 

3. BACKGROUND 

The following provides relevant background information, including challenges and opportunities 
for media and information in Georgia, and other relevant USAID and donor investments. 

 

Journalism under threat 

Once a beacon of a vibrant, free, and unfettered press, Georgia’s media environment is on weaker 
footing in recent years, in particular for those media representatives who challenge the current 
government. They routinely experience threats and verbal attacks, both online and offline, by 
politicians, members of the clergy, and extreme nationalist agitators, in some cases culminating in 
physical attacks. These attacks have reached life-threatening levels, with spikes around elections 
and other politically sensitive events. Observers reported that in the period between the 
parliamentary elections in fall 2020 and local elections in fall 2021, 93 journalists were physically 


attacked, with over half taking place on July 5-6 in a coordinated, violent episode that has not led 
to any arrests, prosecutions, or consequences for those responsible.3 

3 
Pre-election Media Environment, Transparency International/ Georgia 

4 
Varieties of Democracy, https://www.v-dem.net/en/news/harassment-journalists-2017/ 

5 Law of Georgia, Criminal Code 

6 “A Pogrom of the Media: Tbilisi July 5-6, 2021,” Media Advocacy Coalition. 

 

What some call the “Pogrom against Media” on July 5-6 highlights this low point in Georgia's 
deteriorated media environment. The two-day period began with media covering Georgia’s 
LGBTQI+ Pride celebration and ended in mass violence directed at 53 journalists, camera-
operators, and photographers from over 10 media outlets. The perpetrators came from violent far-
right groups who engaged in verbal abuse, physical injuries resulting in death, and deliberate 
destruction of journalists’ equipment. The hostile environment for journalists in Georgia has 
grown over the last two decades: V-Dem 
data shows a steady rise in harassment of 
journalists in Georgia who are “threatened 
with libel, arrested, imprisoned, beaten, or 
killed by governmental or powerful 
nongovernmental actors while engaged in 
legitimate journalistic activities.”4 Although 
Georgia’s laws protect freedom of the press, 
through Criminal Code Article 154 
(unlawful interference with the professional 
activities of journalists5), this Article is 
rarely invoked. Statements from the prime 
minister and the Georgian National 
Communications Commission, demands 
from parliamentarians for a hearing with the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, recommendations of civil society and the international community, 
and the availability of documented video evidence of and witnesses to the violent episode did not 
yield arrests in connection with the incident.6 

Chart, line chart
Description automatically generated 


Subsequently, media workers assumed an activist stance to defend themselves and freedom of the 
press in Georgia. Protests ensued about the lack of action from the authorities in the month after 
the attacks. Broadcasters, such as Mtavari, Pirveli, Formula, and Kavkasia dropped their 
programming for days, airing black screens with the names of injured journalists. They held 
rallies before the parliament to mourn the death of TV Pirveli’s Lekso Lashkarava, push for safe 
working conditions for journalists, demand accountability for the organizers of the violence, and 
call for the resignation of the prime minister and the minister of Internal Affairs. 

 


Georgia has seen backsliding in access to information, as public officials restrict access to 
journalists and institutions by not responding to freedom of information requests. In its June 2021 
report, the Institute for the Development of Freedom of Information (IDFI) noted sharp decreases 
of access to public information during the COVID-19 pandemic, with an 80% response rate for 
requests made to public institutions -- the lowest response rate for IDFI since 2013.7 While 80% 
may seem relatively high, according to IDFI, only 56% of responses were received within the 
required period of 10 days and many were incomplete or of limited use. Furthermore, in 
comparison to 2018, the percentage of complete responses decreased by 7% in 2019, while the 
ratio of unanswered requests increased by 5%; and during 2019 the number of public institutions 
demonstrating 100% access to public information was nearly twice as low as in the previous year. 
Although some of the backsliding may be attributed to the global pandemic and attendant work 
slowdown, it is crucial to build back the government’s responsiveness to information requests. A 
more functioning exchange between government suppliers of information and journalists is 
needed in order to ensure access to information and development of quality content. This includes 
more professional, transparent, and relatively predictable relationships between journalists and 
state institutions such as press offices 
at the local and national levels. 

7 “Access to Public Information in Georgia,” Institute for the Development of Freedom of Information 

Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated 


It is against this backdrop of a more 
dangerous operating context for 
journalists and less accountable 
governance that Reporters Without 
Borders has shown an overall decline 
in Georgia’s rating on the World 
Press Freedom Index, reflecting a 
historic low point for Georgia’s media. 

 

Lack of effective media self-regulation 

There is a weak professional culture of solidarity among media workers to advance the sector or 
advocate for its rights, although the events of July 5-6 galvanized journalists to work together to 
address that moment of crisis. Institutions such as the Georgian Charter of Journalism Ethics are 
vital to bring media workers together in self-regulatory efforts to discuss the state of their 
profession and help mediate ethical reporting practices. The Charter has a diverse membership 
and its efforts are respected, but, according to observers and media workers, are not broadly 
impactful or influential in their ability to improve the quality of media that consumers see. It has 
not been successful in enforcing adherence to the Ethics Charter and does not sufficiently foster 
self-reflection in the profession, for example, through research and analysis into the portrayal of 
various topics by media, or engagement with the public to collectively articulate a positive vision 
for Georgia’s media landscape and enhance public trust in media. 


Although the Media Advocacy Coalition8 has been formed to address press freedom concerns, 
and several civil society organizations are tracking violations against freedom of expression and 
freedom of the press, these are mainly reactive and ad hoc initiatives with little sustained pressure 
to address the urgency to preserve Georgia’s open space for media. This stands in some contrast 
to the early 2000s, during the Shevardnaze era, when the murder of a journalist (for example: 
Georgy Sanaya) could bring masses out into the street and capture high-level attention with vocal 
public support for the sector. 

8 Georgia Media Advocacy Coalition 

9 Public Opinion Survey Residents of Georgia, June 2021, International Republican Institute 

 

Media polarization, shifts in media consumption, lack of public support and trust 

The media landscape in Georgia is diverse, yet politicized. Georgia’s national TV broadcasters 
have traditionally been the most consumed media. They reflect the state of the country’s politics, 
with several serving as a mouthpiece for the ruling party and pro-opposition broadcasters 
unrelentingly critical of it. They are frequently subject to criticism for unethical coverage, 
sensationalization of politics, use of divisive rhetoric across nearly all topics, and for coverage 
that is removed from the day-to-day concerns of regular Georgian citizens. Consequently, they do 
not enjoy a high level of trust among the public, according to public opinion surveys. In an IRI 
poll, 45% of respondents expressed trust in Imedi TV (pro-governmental), 29% in Mtavari Arkhi 
(oppositional), and 36% in Rustavi2 (formerly oppositional, before change in ownership),9 with 
respondents generally trusting broadcasters that conformed with their own political perspectives. 

These polarized national TV stations, however, are not the sole providers of information and are 
increasingly losing their hold on the attention of citizens as consumer habits in Georgia are 
changing. 

 

A July 2021 NDI survey shows a considerable drop since 2014 in TV consumption as the main 
source of news about Georgian politics and current events (from 85% to 57%). At the same time, 
use of the internet and social media have increased dramatically (from 7% to 35%). The increase 
in online consumption is mainly generational, with young (18-34) consumers consuming nearly 
twice as much of their information online as their primary source for news about politics and 


current events (62%) than consumers age 35-54 (35%) (and only 11% of ages 55 and above 
consuming news online).10 

10 
Public Attitudes in Georgia, July 2021 National Democratic Institute 

11“Vibrant Information Barometer 2021 / Georgia,” IREX 

12 
“Georgian media outlets support communities during the COVID-19 pandemic,” IREX, February 2021 

13 USAGM: Georgia Media Use Survey Analytical Report, Nationally Representative Survey in the Republic of Georgia, 
November 2020 – January 2021 

14 
https://agenda.ge/en/news/2021/1232 

Chart, line chart
Description automatically generated 


Georgians are also turning to alternative sources for information, such as local and regional 
broadcasters and online media, and a burgeoning alternative ecosystem online of independent 
content producers that 
enjoy trust among 
their communities. 
These alternative 
information sources 
cover issues that are 
relevant to citizens’ 
daily lives, in 
languages that they 
speak.11 They 
increasingly play a 
role in mobilizing 
citizens around 
community needs and problems. Examples range from mobilizing a community to get its local 
authorities to repair a non-functioning movie theater, to raising awareness of those in greatest 
need in a community, to producing oral histories to help a community at the border reflect on the 
conflict it endured in the 1990s. Previous USAID support to regional media implemented by 
IREX has shown that, “citizens provide leads to their local community media outlets that, in turn, 
advocate for change by making those issues visible at a larger scale and promoting accountability 
for local governments.”12 

 

Vital to their communities, they can actively tap into comparatively high levels of civic 
participation in Georgia where, according to a USAGM study, a substantial number of citizens are 
engaged in local politics and community organizations.13 This was notable in the grassroots 
community engagement and protest in the Rioni gorge over the Namakhvani hydropower project, 
which ultimately delayed its construction.14 Local media, such as Mtis Ambebi, played an 
important role in serving their communities by consistently engaging on issues of key concern 
and amplifying the voices of local citizens in ways that national media do not and are not 
equipped to do. 


For communities far from the capital, rural communities, Armenian and Azerbaijani settlements, 
local media serve as essential sources of fact-based information in their community’s native 
language. This is of particular importance as there is a high prevalence in these communities to 
consume non-Georgian media, specifically Kremlin-owned or pro-Kremlin TV channels, 
according to an April 2019 survey. 15 

15 
Public Attitudes in Georgia Results of April 2019 Survey (NDI/CRRC) 

16 
“Georgia: An Information Ecosystem Assessment” Internews, February 2021 

17 
Ibid. 

18 Vibrant Information Barometer 2021 / Georgia, IREX 

 

Georgia’s digital media upstarts also demonstrate an alternative path for Georgia’s information 
landscape, but many of them are small and underfunded. According to an Internews report, 
“Georgia: An Information Ecosystem Assessment,” a defining feature of the information 
landscape is the growing role of social media platforms for production, distribution and 
consumption of information, with consumers primarily using Facebook, Messenger, YouTube, 
Viber, Whatsapp, and Instagram and with two thirds of Facebook users reporting using the 
platform “all the time.”16 Popular digital and social media platforms have enabled local media to 
expand their geographic reach, with small digital startups able to capture a large share of the 
audience through creative, innovative storytelling; for example, RegInfo, a local outlet in 
Gurjaani, is among the most followed channels on YouTube, and Radio Nor, a community radio 
in ethnic-Armenian Ninotsminda, is listed among the most followed media on Instagram.17 There 
are also a promising set of emerging online influencers who may serve as potential deliverers of 
critical news and information, and are a part of the information landscape where young content 
creators dominate. 

 

A significant challenge to the viability of much of Georgia’s broadcast media sector is the lack of 
research and data that would help individual outlets measure and understand their audiences in 
order to further develop their commercial potential. Although such data exists for national TV 
broadcasters (TVMR and Kantar Media Group surveys), local and regional media do not have 
sufficient granular data about their audiences, although the Vibrant Information Barometer 2021 
states that the combined audience for media that are members of the Alliance of Broadcasters are 
placed among the top 15 by audience size in the country.18 Online media are able to use 
traditional web measurement and analytics tools, such as Google Analytics and Facebook 
Analytics to better understand their audiences and to present data to advertisers and sponsors. 

Georgia’s advertising market is small and unable to sustain the entire media sector: according to 
the Internews report, the market consists of $34 million advertising market for TV for 2019 (a 
10% drop from 2018), with approximately 71% going to TV Imedi and Rustavi 2; $3.1 million 
for radio; and an estimated $1.8 million for print in 2018. In 2019, there was nearly $1 million in 
state advertising, with 59% going to Imedi and Rustavi 2. There is limited information available 
on advertising on digital media, although there are figures on state spending and from Facebook 


on advertisements during elections.19 The commercial potential for independent media in Georgia 
is small, and therefore more appropriate models for independent media outlets may include 
community-based and non-profit models, which have increasingly become an adopted practice 
elsewhere in the world.20 

19 “Georgia: An Information Ecosystem Assessment” Internews, February 2021 

20 
“Five Reasons 2020 was the Year of Non-Profit Local News,” Knight Foundation, December 2020, “New nonprofit news 
report: More local outlets come online,” Knight Foundation, June 2020, “How More Philanthropists, Local Foundations Can 
Sustain Local News” Knight Foundation, January 2021 

21 https://www.irex.org/project/media-transparent-and-accountable-governance-m-tag 

22 https://www.usaid.gov/news-information/press-releases/oct-8-2020-usaid-launches-innovative-program-counter-
disinformation-georgia 

 

Relevant USAID and other donor investments 

Media for Transparent and Accountable Governance Activity 

 

USAID/Georgia has made significant investments into Georgia’s formal media sector, most 
recently, through the support to the Media for Transparent and Accountable Governance (M-
TAG) activity implemented by IREX from 2014 - 2021.21 The activity focused on the institutional 
development of a core group of 15 regional media outlets to improve and increase their content 
production capacity, online presence, and business management. The core group comprised media 
outlets focused on serving ethnic minority communities or located near conflict zones, and 
produced content in six languages spoken in Georgia. The activity provided operational support to 
the Georgian Charter of Journalistic Ethics, the self-regulatory organization for Georgian 
journalists, which provided guidance on ethical reporting, conducted award competitions for 
journalists, received and responded to complaints about media content, issued public statements 
and hosted discussion programs on professional standards. 

The new media activity should build upon the lessons learned from this previous investment in 
trusted, regional outlets, in order to preserve the space for M-TAG partners to continue to serve 
their communities. Specifically it may seek to leverage their credibility and standing as a source 
of influence to create “communities of action” and support deliberative democratic practice. The 
activity should build upon prior investment in the Georgian Charter of Journalistic Ethics, which 
may more effectively fulfill its potential in striving for a high level of standards in Georgia’s 
information space, and contribute to the efforts of institutions and coalitions seeking to improve 
the enabling environment and the self-regulatory processes for media. 

 

Counter-Disinformation Programming 

USAID/Georgia’s Georgia Information Integrity Program is a five-year initiative designed to 
help Georgia build societal resilience against disinformation implemented by Zinc Network (from 
2020-2025).22 This effort adopts a comprehensive, “whole-of-society” approach to protecting 
Georgia’s information space, and is cultivating a network of domestic actors who actively combat 
disinformation to ensure that Georgia’s citizens have access to fact-based information about key 


issues. This program partners with Georgian organizations to map sources of disinformation, 
measure its impacts, disseminate fact-based messages, and co-create new tools and methods for 
responding to disinformation. Its key approaches include: (1) Cultivating a sustainable network of 
researchers, practitioners, and policymakers working to protect the country’s information space 
from malign influence through the Information Integrity Coalition, which responds to 
disinformation events and trends; (2) Researching disinformation and developing effective 
solutions for mitigating its impact by mapping the disinformation ecosystem operating in Georgia, 
assessing how different audiences are impacted by certain disinformation messages and designing 
interventions accordingly; and (3) Scaling-up local efforts and partnering with independent media 
and civil society organizations to pilot, scale, and sustain projects that measurably strengthen 
Georgia’s resilience to disinformation. 

 

As the USAID Media Program will affirmatively contribute to Georgia’s information system, 
there will be a natural convergence between it and Georgia Information Integrity Program. This 
activity will ensure coordination with Georgia Information Integrity Program’s efforts to enhance 
information integrity, foster collaboration with Georgia Information Integrity Program’s network 
of actors protecting the information space, and utilize data produced by that activity. 

Internet Freedom Programming 

 

USAID’s Center for Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance administers the Greater 
Internet Freedom (GIF) program, a three-year (2020-2023), consortium based, global program 
implemented by Internews that works with regional and local organizations to preserve an open, 
interoperable, reliable and secure Internet–and by extension, protects the citizens, civic actors, 
journalists, and human rights defenders who rely on it to realize fundamental freedoms.23 The 
objectives of GIF include: Objective 1 – Enhanced Digital Safety for Civil Society and Media, 
will focus on increasing the digital safety capacity of vulnerable groups and individuals, increase 
the number of experts in digital safety, build capacity on incident response, and improve 
accessibility of digital safety for non-technical individuals. Objective 2 – Increased Citizen 
Engagement in Internet Governance, aims to expand the Internet freedom community to non-
traditional partners, create and maintain multi-stakeholder networks in Internet governance, 
strengthen Internet freedom legal environments, and increase Internet freedom in national-level 
advocacy efforts and public discussion. 

23 https://internews.org/global-consortium-launches-three-year-effort-strengthen-internet-freedom-50-countries/ 

 

To enhance digital security of civil society and media actors in Georgia, GIF works to increase 
the capacity of CSOs, media outlets, and individuals in both preventive and responsive digital 
security approaches, and increase the number of local digital security experts able to advance 
digital security capabilities. GIF works to increase the integration of internet freedom into 
national level advocacy efforts and public discussion through published policy briefs and 
involving multi-stakeholder networks in Internet governance to promote long term collaboration 
among civil society groups. 

 


The new media activity should integrate and make use of the expertise cultivated through the GIF 
activity to address the digital safety and security of information and media institutions and actors 
to enhance their resilience to digital intrusions and attacks; and incorporate policy expertise into 
larger Internet governance processes to foster a more trusted and safe Internet. These may 
contribute to the outcomes prescribed in Objective 1. 

Other Donor-Led Initiatives 

 

Key donors supporting Georgia’s media sector include: 

● National Endowment for Democracy, which provides core operational grants for 
independent media and investigative journalism, with an emphasis on media outside of 
Tbilisi and media that support non-Georgian speaking populations; as well as support for 
the Georgian Charter for Journalistic Ethics; 
● European Commission, which intends to launch activities to ensure the plurality of media, 
through supporting content production and providing technical assistance for media to 
develop financial sustainability; and 
● European Endowment for Democracy, which supports media outlets that have received 
little donor support, need bridge funding, or fill gaps in the information landscape. 


 

4. PROGRAM ACTIVITIES 

This activity seeks to address an evolving set of changes in Georgia’s media and information 
landscape. These changes include the deterioration of robust access to information and freedom of 
expression; the polarization of public discourse that is, in part, due to the lack of adherence to 
ethical standards within the media sector; and changes in how Georgian citizens are accessing 
news and current events that are relevant to their communities. 

 

The activity seeks to achieve: 

● Preservation of a free and open environment for freedom of expression and press; 
● Greater commitment in the media and information sector to ethical and professional 
content and journalism in the public interest; 
● Increased availability of civically relevant, fact-based information across a variety of 
platforms/formats for citizens and their communities; 
● Innovation in content and community-oriented business models to engage audiences and 
increase viability; and 
● Increased trust and investment by citizens in the media they consume. 


 

Objective 1: Protect and strengthen an enabling environment that fosters press freedom and 
access to information. 

Given the volatile state of the operating environment for journalists, the activity will support more 
sustained and strategic advocacy to address the unacceptable level of harassment and violence 
against journalists, calling for accountability from perpetrators of attacks against journalists (in 
violation of Article 154 of the criminal code: unlawful interference with the professional activities 
of journalists) and from state institutions that have failed to protect them and uphold the rule of 
law. The activity will work with existing coalitions, grow and strengthen their connections, and 
seek to employ creative or untried approaches towards more effective advocacy to keep attention 
on the safety of journalists and accountability for those involved in attacks. 

 


The activity will build the capacity of legal specialists providing assistance to journalists in order 
to increase access to justice for media and journalists. This may include support to lawyers 
addressing the increase in FOIA lawsuits and those bringing strategic cases relevant to protecting 
journalists and the practice of journalism, including, but not limited to, redress for journalists who 
have been victims of violence as a consequence of performing their professional duties. It may 
also support increased collaboration between journalists and other stakeholders involved in 
monitoring and addressing the quality of access to information in Georgia and upholding 
Georgia’s commitment to the Open Government Partnership.24 

24 https://www.opengovpartnership.org/members/georgia/ 

25 A comprehensive, and slightly dated survey of relevant issues can be found in UNESCO’s publication “Building 
Digital Safety for Journalism” (2015) and the more recent OSCE resources Safety of Female Journalists Online 
(2020) 

26 “Online Attacks on Women Journalists Leading to ‘Real World’ Violence, New Research Shows” Posetti, 
Harrison and Waisbord (November 25, 2020) 

 

As it has become more challenging for media to operate in Georgia, the activity will take a 
holistic and proactive approach to prepare those engaged in independent reporting for their 
professional work, particularly those who may encounter dangerous situations, or engage in high-
risk reporting. It will mitigate risks through a combination of training, equipment provision, and 
development of operational protocols to address physical and digital security concerns. 

Given the recent exposure of surveillance by the security services of journalists, it is increasingly 
evident that there is a need to help journalists secure their data and communications. This will be 
addressed in this activity through digital and operational security awareness and digital hygiene 
assistance. Where possible, media activists should be engaging in higher level and multi-
stakeholder policy discussions on how the Internet is governed in Georgia, to ensure their equities 
are reflected in the development of policies and regulatory frameworks for a trusted and safe 
Internet. All efforts to protect journalists overall should include these digital protections. 

 

Protection of media assets online (i.e. protecting websites from being hacked, social media 
accounts getting trolled, communications being intercepted) will also include exploring options 
for interventions to protect media outlets’ institutional reputation, efforts towards creating a safer, 
more trusted and inclusive space online, as well as mitigating cases of harassment and trolling 
online, which is frequently directed at women and minorities. Physical attacks against journalists 
have been preceded by threats and verbal attacks online and offline. Proposed interventions 
should reflect best practices in the field ranging from newsroom strategies to address harassment 
online, to individual strategies and practices, to focusing on larger systemic issues of Internet 
governance reflecting the concerns of media and journalists.25 The disproportionate impact on 
women journalists and women working online should be a special consideration for interventions 
that will require a differentiated approach, as recent research26 has shown a direct link between 
online harassment leading to offline violence for women journalists. 

 


The activity will incorporate psychosocial support to help media workers prepare for reporting in 
dangerous situations, and handle the stress (including post-traumatic stress) that accompanies 
their work and affects their emotions, judgement, and behavior. 

Interventions under this objective will dedicate no less than $200,000 annually towards 
interventions that may be categorized as “Internet freedom” (that includes: assistance towards 
enhancing the digital safety capacities of journalists to exercise their human rights online and 
policy and advocacy support for an open and free Internet), and will coordinate closely with 
USAID’s Greater Internet Freedom Activity, which the Development, Democracy, and Innovation 
Bureau supports and also operates in Georgia. 

 

Expected results: 

● Persistent, effective, and strategic advocacy for media and Internet freedom and access to 
information; 
● Increased availability of legal assistance for media workers; 
● Enhanced safety and security of media workers through physical, digital, and psychosocial 
training and support; and 
● Strengthened initiatives to create a safer, more trusted and inclusive online environment. 


 

Illustrative indicators: 

The activity will be able to track progress towards achieving anticipated outcomes through 
customized indicators as well as against larger, extant, data sets. These may include: 

● Institute for the Development of Freedom of Information’s Access to Public Information 
in Georgia data 
● Number of journalists receiving legal assistance, as well as number of positive outcomes 
as a result of such assistance 
● Number of advocacy campaigns addressing policy and law governing the enabling 
environment for media and freedom of expression in Georgia, and positive outcomes of 
such campaigns 


 

Objective 2: Develop more effective self-regulation among media professionals and 
information producers that sets standards for quality and ethics. 

At present, Georgia’s media regulator, the National Communications Commission (GNCC), is 
reconsidering the current regime of self-regulation (for broadcasters) with a more rigid regulatory 
framework. Although self-regulatory regimes within broadcasters are weak, ethics codes poorly 
articulated and enforced, and internal structures to address ethical and user-rights concerns 
lacking, independent and oppositional media are skeptical of increased regulation from the state, 
given the politicization of the regulator. 

 

 

Although the policy decisions of the GNCC are outside the control of this activity, the activity 
will propose efforts to engage at the level of individual journalists and non-governmental media 
support actors (such as Georgian Charter of Journalistic Ethics,27 Coalition for Media Advocacy 

27 
Georgian Charter of Journalistic Ethics 


and others) to network journalists across the ideological spectrum, provide forums for collective 
action to improve ethics in the sector, and engage with a broader public in a constructive 
discussion of the sector’s strengths and weaknesses. 

This objective will stimulate more rigorous and impactful self-regulation, analysis, and research 
in the information sector. In this objective, the activity intends to support more constructive and 
actionable analysis and research as well as discussion fora that aim to foster greater and more 
effective and transparent self-reflection and self-criticism within the industry in order to cultivate 
public confidence in the institutions of journalism. 

 

At this time, the existing actors (such as the Georgian Charter of Journalistic Ethics), though 
respected, are not sufficiently effective or influential to engage the industry and the broader public 
to hold the industry more accountable to professional standards. There are no forums of the 
requisite status or profile (for example, among the media or academia) that are consistently, 
scientifically monitoring content, bringing it to the public discussion, and stimulating much-
needed media self-scrutiny. This activity will work to address this by raising the profile of 
respected and authoritative voices and institutions within or outside of the industry to recognize 
excellence within the sector as well as respectfully and constructively call out work that is not up 
to standard. These efforts should aim to cultivate a more vibrant community for public monitoring 
of media and media critique, operating from the principle that these efforts are done in good faith 
to increase public trust and public support for media through transparent and constructive 
questioning of media and journalists’ work and transparency of ownership and influence.28 

28 
“DEMOCRACY PLAYBOOK 2021 10 Commitments for Advancing Democracy”; Brookings Institutions (December 2021) 

29 https://www.journalismtrustinitiative.org/ 

 

These efforts will not only aim to raise the quality of information that Georgian citizens receive, 
as well as expect, providing them with high-quality alternatives, but should also attempt to de-
escalate the polarized nature of public discourse found in Georgian mainstream media and social 
media. Although such ambitions may address aspects of Georgian society beyond the scope of 
this activity, USAID encourages collaborations that seek to address this issue. 

 

The activity will not focus exclusively on the professional journalism cadre and will be inclusive 
of those influencers and content producers who are increasingly a part of the information market. 
The activity will include these players, which generally lay outside regulatory and self-regulatory 
processes, into these industry discussions. It may look to forge new partnerships, for example 
with international journalism ethics initiatives such as the Journalism Trust Initiative.29 

 

Expected results: 

● Improved self-regulation within the media sector; 
● Increased adherence to the Ethical Charter; 
● Increased public support for media; and 
● More effective institutions of media analysis and criticism. 


 


Illustrative Indicators: 

Notional indicators demonstrating the dynamics of change in this Objective may include: 

● Academic studies of journalists, media, or online influencers subscription to an ethical 
code of professional conduct; 
● Ratings of media outlets’ ethical performance and adherence to ethical codes; 
● Public opinion studies on perceptions of journalists’ ethical performance; 
● Assessments of the landscape of institutions, observers, and scholars engaged in media 
analysis. 


 

Objective 3: Increase the availability of civically relevant, fact-based, and engaging 
independent sources of information. 

 

Identifying and supporting quality content 

The activity will focus towards informational content production as opposed to traditional media 
outlet institutional strengthening. The activity will work with content producers that meet their 
audiences where they are: reaching them through the languages and platforms they use, such as 
social media, television, radio, print; and in the formats they prefer, such as audiovisual, pictorial, 
and text. It will support engaging, fact-based content that addresses community concerns and 
ensures all levels of government are held accountable to the citizens they serve. 

 

Consumption trends show news and information is increasingly online and on social media. This 
activity will be oriented towards enriching news feeds with content that is consequential in the 
lives of Georgia’s citizens and getting important stories reported and noticed. This content will 
demonstrate journalistic ethics, be produced in an engaging manner, and effectively reach target 
audiences. 

 

The activity will take an expansive view of the information and media landscape beyond 
traditional media institutions that will be eligible for support to produce high quality content in 
the public interest. This may include teams of investigative journalists, online influencers, 
YouTubers, bloggers, TikTokers, start-ups, or teams working on innovative productions within 
traditional newsrooms, as well as collaborations between platforms or journalists. The sector now 
contains a range of players and formats, operating on different platforms and serving different 
segments of the audience. The activity will place particular emphasis on those content producers 
building “communities of action” and supporting deliberative democratic practice,30 and that 
provide the information that strengthens the collective action of communities to help build 
institutions and/or take action where institutions are failing the communities they are supposed to 

30 This activity will work with media and information actors to create spaces for deliberative democracy, defined in a recent report 
from Center for International Media Assistance (“The Wisdom of the Crowd: Promoting Media Development through 
Deliberative Initiatives,” Craig Matasick, September 2020) as “citizen engagement practices which can help to ensure that local 
governance more accurately reflects the needs of a representative cross-section of local citizens, avoiding elite capture or the 
dominance of a particular social or political faction” and can be assisted by appropriate media engagement to ensure wider 
receptivity by citizens.” As the report suggests, “deliberative democracy practices can help media outlets ensure the relevance of 
their content to the public and can help address the challenges of disinformation and media manipulation,” a concern particularly 
relevant to communities or parts of the population that consume pro-Kremlin or Kremlin supported media. 


serve. The activity will generate or make use of available audience data in order to identify key 
community issues and ensure content reaches target audiences. 

 

Exploring business and non-profit models for media and content production 

The activity should focus on experimentation to assist media and content providers to develop 
viable business models with diversified revenue sources. It should build a community of practice 
among media entrepreneurs that are working in this area to share best practices, results of 
experiments, and new and innovative ideas. Financial viability for media working in the public 
interest is a challenge globally in both developed and developing media markets. A recent study 
into the state of digital native media [media companies that were born and grown entirely online] 
in developing contexts shows the similarities among news organizations across geographies as 
they strive to cover their communities and build sustainable business models.31 The study 
concludes that although most operate with relatively small budgets, “they have an impact that 
punches above their weight when compared to the size of their teams and resources.”32 The study 
provides insight into how they generate revenue, which is often diversified, but primarily consists 
of grants (on average 30%), in addition to ads, services, and revenue from readers. 

31“Inflection Point International,” Sembra Media and Luminate Group, November 2021 

32 
Ibid. 

33 
“Five Reasons 2020 was the Year of Non-Profit Local News,” Knight Foundation, December 2020, “New nonprofit news 
report: More local outlets come online,” Knight Foundation, June 2020, “How More Philanthropists, Local Foundations Can 
Sustain Local News” Knight Foundation, January 2021 

 

Georgian media are no different. Media managers, like their counterparts overseas, are exploring 
new models for financial viability that align with global practices for non-profit media.33 With a 
small commercial advertising base available to media, non-profit, community-based, or 
philanthropy-driven models are promising in this context, particularly for those media/content 
producers that enjoy meaningful connections and trust with audiences. Outlets that have the 
resources are conducting feasibility studies and experimenting with new models such as 
membership models, subscriptions, paywalls, and others. This activity will stimulate 
entrepreneurship in the sector and will seek to connect media with their counterparts across the 
region or working in analogous contexts to grow the community of practitioners in the media 
entrepreneurship space, and to ensure their exposure to other business models and solutions that 
they may potentially test or adapt. This proposed activity will enable exploration and 
experimentation with the range of models that may be viable in the Georgian context that will 
help media diversify their funding sources, reform their business models, stimulate 
entrepreneurship, and grow and intensify their engagement with their audiences. 

 

Where appropriate, this activity will advance collaboration among media and information actors 
and the private sector. It will explore mobilizing private-sector action and resources including 
philanthropy and corporate social responsibility assets. 

 

Expected results: 


● Increased availability of media and information in the public interest on a range of 
platforms and reaching diverse parts of the population; 
● Enhanced watchdog journalism through accountability and investigative journalism; 
● Increased community engagement through relevant content in the public interest; and 
● Increased experimentation with new business models for media and content producers that 
strengthen their financial viability. 
● 


Illustrative indicators: 

Notional indicators or data sets to illustrate the dynamics of changes covered in this Objective 
may include: 

● Media and information landscape assessments; 
● Audience surveys; 
● Business assessments of media and information institutions; 
● Metrics of various news and information producers demonstrating engagement, as well as 
qualitative studies providing insight into the nature of that engagement. 
● Number of non-state news outlets assisted by USG 
● Number of journalists trained and supported 
● Number of corruption-related news stories published by journalists and non-state news 
outlets supported by USG 


 

5. OPERATING PRIORITIES AND POLICY GUIDANCE 

The following operational guidance will be crucial for the successful and sustainable 
implementation of this activity and should be applied to all services and deliverables specified in 
the Cooperative Agreement. These priorities and guidance relate to: a) Relationship to Country 
Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS); b) Flexibility and Adaptability & Refine and 
Implement Approach; c) Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility; and d) Coordination and 
Collaboration. 

 

a. Relationship to Country Development Cooperation Strategy: 


The USAID Media Program directly supports USAID/Georgia’s Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy 2020-2025.34Results contribute to Development Objective 2: Fragile 
Democratic Gains Consolidated Through Enhanced Citizen Responsive Governance; Intermediate 
Result (IR) 2.1 Civic Participation Catalyzed; sub-IR2.1.2 Civic Activism and Oversight 
increased. The activity will enhance citizen-responsive governance through improved citizen 
capacity to engage with the government and demand that Georgia’s institutions deliver 
meaningful, responsive results through open and accountable governance and rule of law. 

34 
Country Development and Cooperation Strategy -- Georgia 2020-2025 

The activity will also contribute to the Agency’s Countering Malign Kremlin Influence (CMKI) 
framework’s objective 2: Resist the Manipulation of the Information and its sub-objectives of 2.1 
Bolster the capacity of indigenous media to provide professional, trusted news and information 
and 2.3 Strengthen the legal and regulatory operating environment for press freedom. The activity 
will provide short reports of programmatic successes to the Europe and Eurasia Bureau through 
the AOR. 


 

b. Flexibility and Adaptability & Refine and Implement Approach 


 

Flexibility and Adaptability 

USAID recognizes the importance of thinking critically and shifting strategic decisions to respond 
to emerging challenges.35 Maintaining a high-degree of programmatic and operational flexibility 
and adaptability to ensure responsiveness to evolving dynamics is crucial. This will require 
proactive management that regularly adjusts program planning, implementation, and results 
measurement. The activity should consider employing a range of tools such as inception periods, 
co-creation approaches, living work plans, iterative assessment or refinement periods, or other 
appropriate methods in line with USAID's A&A Strategy and USAID Automated Directives 
System ADS policy.36 

35 
USAID, "Discussion Note: Adaptive Management," January 2018 

36 
USAID, "ADS Chapter 303: Grants and Cooperative Agreements to Non-Governmental Organizations" 

 

Rigorous Monitoring, Evaluation, and Adaptive learning 

USAID/Georgia intends to support activities that utilize data and evidence for the greatest chance 
of success. USAID/Georgia strongly encourages partners to use collaborating, learning, and 
adapting (CLA) approaches as highlighted in ADS 201.3.7 to achieve better development 
outcomes. This approach involves strategic collaboration, systematic and continuous learning and 
adaptive management. While CLA is not a new approach, these practices often do not occur 
regularly, are not systematic and not deliberate. Partners will achieve this intentionally by 
identifying knowledge gaps in their activity’s theory of change or by filling gaps in the evidence 
that designers used when creating the activity. Intentionality may be achieved by creating and 
taking opportunities for stakeholders to track progress and to discuss challenges, opportunities, 
and changes in context. To complement the Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning plan’s 
functions, the recipient will continuously review progress and challenges, integrate and document 
lessons learned, and adapt interventions accordingly. 

 

Refine and Implement Approach 

In order to address the opportunities, challenges, and emerging threats of a dynamic environment 
for media and journalists in Georgia, USAID advocates the use of a Refine and Implement 
approach, which the Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance developed in 2016 and updated in 2021. 
Intended to improve activity design and implementation planning, as well as sustainability of 
results, Refine and Implement includes two stages. In year one, during the ‘refinement period,’ 
the Recipient should consider undertaking a series of steps including: small scale operational 
research, and piloting of new approaches; and participatory stakeholder engagement and 
community consultation for strengthened local partnerships. In year two, implementation of 
revised planning and programmatic interventions would be based on consultation with 
USAID/Georgia. 

 

 


c. Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility 


The activity aims to enhance the vibrancy of the information landscape in Georgia and promote 
discussion that is reflective of the interests and voices of numerous publics.37 To this end, 
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility should be incorporated in all interventions of the 
media activity. Independent media and information actors working in the service of the public 
interest should be diverse in ownership/foundership/senior leadership, journalist in-take classes, 
editorial staff, interview subjects and “expert” opinions, and content and representation. 

37 
World Economic Forum: Tackling Diversity and Inclusion in the Newsroom 

38 Public Attitudes in Georgia, July 2021 National Democratic Institute 

 

Youth Engagement 

The program will prioritize youth engagement throughout all activities. It will support new media 
actors and online influencers, many of whom are youth and will promote engagement and 
networking of youth participants across USAID programs. 

 

Gender and Marginalized Groups 

Gender and intersectionality will be integrated into this activity’s implementation approach. 
Initiatives in the media and information space must recognize women’s agency and knowledge. 
Women and gender and sexual minorities, as well as ethnic minorities, must participate as co-
designers of programs and engage as competent members of society with equal potential to devise 
solutions rather than perceived one-dimensionally as beneficiaries or victims. 

 

The activity will prioritize support for women and girls’ rights and gender analysis—viewing it 
not only as a requirement as per USAID’s ADS Chapter 205—but as a best practice and key part 
of achieving the overarching programmatic goal and objectives. 

 

While in many cases independent media entities and civil society organizations are leading the 
fight for universally recognized human rights, they may also be a space in which gender 
inequality and other forms of discrimination are reproduced. While some segments of the sector 
have provided much-needed leadership opportunities for women, women have often stalled there, 
blocked from transferring their leadership skills to other sectors. By failing to be inclusive, media 
organizations may also perpetuate gender inequality and other forms of discrimination, 
weakening the democratic culture they seek to strengthen. As appropriate, the activity will work 
with media outlets to challenge gender stereotypes to advance the role of women. 

 

Media for Underserved Populations 

The activity should target support to segments of Georgia’s population that are underserved by 
the mainstream media and enjoy few content options that reflect their voices, articulate their 
concerns, or report on issues that matter to them. Youth, for example, as reflected in the July 2021 
NDI survey,38 are turning away from mainstream broadcasts and going online as their primary 
source for news about politics and current events. Ethnic minorities are often deprived of critical 


information in their own languages, and their stories and concerns are rarely reflected in the 
media to the larger Georgian society. 

 

The USAID Media Program should consider supporting measures to diversify newsrooms in 
terms of staff, information sources, and coverage. Priorities include support for marginalized and 
underrepresented community-owned and led media outlets;39 advocating for the ability of all 
members of society, specifically those who are disproportionately targeted by online violence and 
harassment, to participate in public discussion on internet platforms without fear of online 
violence and harassment; and amplifying underrepresented voices in advocacy platforms. 

39 
Such groups may include, but are not limited to, women and girls, persons with disabilities, LGBTQI+ people, displaced persons, migrants, 
indigenous individuals and communities, youth and the elderly, religious minorities, ethnic minorities, people in historically marginalized castes, 
people of color, and people of diverse economic class. These groups often suffer from discrimination in the application of laws and policy and/or 
access to resources, services, and social protection, and may be subject to persecution, harassment, and/or violence. They may also be described as 
“underrepresented,” “at-risk,” or “vulnerable”. (adapted from ADS 201 Additional Help Doc) 

 

 

d. Coordination and Collaboration 

USAID/Georgia has an extensive history of support for participatory civil society and 
independent media (both traditional and digital) as key sectors undergirding democratic 
governance and broad-based prosperity by representing citizen interests and striving to make 
governments more transparent and accountable through advocacy, oversight, and outreach. 

In addition, USAID/Georgia programs support a diverse portfolio across a broad spectrum to 
include governance, education, and economic growth. Given this proposed activity has the 
potential to engage all sectors, the media program will be expected to fully coordinate with 
existing U.S. Government programs and implementing partners to prevent duplication of effort. 

 

 

END OF SECTION A 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

 

1. ESTIMATE OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 


 

USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency. USAID intends to 
provide up to $10,000,000 in total USAID funding over a 5-year period. 

 

USAID reserves right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

 

 

2. START DATE AND PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE FOR FEDERAL AWARDS 

 

The anticipated period of performance is 5 years from signing of the Cooperative Agreement. The 
estimated start date will be September 2022. 

 

3. SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 


 

Substantial involvement during the implementation of this Agreement must be limited to approval 
of the elements listed below. An Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) will substantially be 
involved in the administration of a cooperative agreement to help the implementer achieve the 
agreement objectives in the following areas in accordance with ADS 303.3.11: 

 

• Review and Approval of Recipient’s Work Plans and Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning Plan (MEL) by the AOR; 

• Review and Approval of key personnel by the Agreement Officer (AO) following 
technical concurrence of the AOR; 

• Approval of sub-awards/subcontracts, and/or the substantive technical 
/programmatic provisions of the sub-awards by the Agreement Officer following technical 
concurrence of the AOR (see definitions in 2 CFR 200). 

• Agency monitoring to permit specific kinds of direction or redirection of the work 
because of the interrelationships with other projects or activities. All such direction or 
redirection must be within the program description budget, and other terms and conditions 
of the award. 


 

4. KEY PERSONNEL 

 

Three key personnel positions for this Cooperative Agreement are: Chief of Party, Deputy Chief 
of Party, and Media Business and Innovation Specialist. The combined experience of the 
proposed key personnel management team should include expertise in media content production, 
advocacy, and media self-regulation, as well as capacity for strategic planning, project 
management, finance and administrative management and oversight, and external 
communications. 


 

Minimum Qualifications for the Key Personnel are as follows: 

 

● Chief of Party (COP) (Expatriate position) should demonstrate subject matter expertise 
and a thorough understanding of the issues surrounding the media sector such as content 
production, advocacy, or media self-regulation. Demonstrated ability to effectively manage a 
diverse team of employees is required. The COP should have experience with co-creation 
exercises, fostering experimentation and encouraging programmatic risks where warranted; the 
COP should also have strong interpersonal skills and demonstrated ability to network and 
maintain effective working relationships with diverse sets of actors, including media managers, 
content producers, civic groups, the government, private and public sectors, and donors. The COP 
should be an expatriate. The COP should be full-time and located in Georgia and have sufficient 
authority for the program to run efficiently and effectively. Fluency in English (both verbal and 
written) is required. 

● Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) should have knowledge and understanding of media and 
civil society issues in Georgia, and experience working with donor-funded programs. The DCOP 
should have the strong interpersonal skills necessary to maintain good relations with local CSOs, 
media and information actors, private sector actors, USAID, and other personnel associated with 
this program. The DCOP must have extensive professional experience in managing and 
implementing multi-component programs and demonstrated ability to effectively manage staff. 
The DCOP should be full-time and located in Georgia. Fluency in English (both verbal and 
written) and Georgian (both verbal and written) is required. 

● Business and Innovation Specialist will focus on efforts under Objective 3 of the activity 
to work with media outlets, managers, and content producers to strengthen their business models 
and adopt new innovative practices that enable viability, and where possible, sustainability and/or 
profitability. S/he should demonstrate subject matter expertise and a thorough understanding of 
the contemporary issues surrounding the viability of media, the online influencer economy, 
content monetization strategies, and current trends in non-profit media models. The Business and 
Innovation Specialist should also have strong interpersonal skills and demonstrated ability to 
network and maintain effective working relationships with diverse sets of actors, such as program 
staff, journalists, media managers, online influencers, content producers, tech sector, advertisers, 
and other relevant stakeholders. Fluency in English (both verbal and written) is required. 

 

5. AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 

 

The authorized geographic codes for procurement of goods and services under this award are 937 
(the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source) and 110 (the United 
States, the independent states of the former Soviet Union, or a developing country, but excluding 
any country that is a prohibited source). 

 

6. PLACE OF PERFORMANCE 

 

The activity will be implemented in Georgia. 

 

 


7. TITLE TO PROPERTY 

 

Property title under the resultant agreement shall vest with the recipient in accordance with the 
requirements of 2 CFR 200 regarding use, accountability, and disposition of such property. 

 

8. NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the USAID Media 
Program which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for 
ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration 
of the award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume 
responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, 
program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

9. SELECTION OF INSTRUMENT 

 

USAID Media program seeks to address an evolving set of changes in Georgia’s media and 
information landscape. These changes include how Georgian citizens are accessing news and 
current events that are relevant to their communities; the deterioration of access to information 
and freedom of expression; and the polarization of public discourse that is, in part, due to the lack 
of adherence to ethical standards within the media sector. The activity will work toward the 
following anticipated objectives: (1) Preserve and strengthen an enabling environment that fosters 
press freedom and access to information. (2) Develop more effective self-regulation among media 
professionals and information producers that sets standards for quality and ethics. (3) Increase the 
number of high quality, alternative, independent sources of information that are available to 
communities. 

 

The intent of this activity is to provide support to an organization that will identify and work with 
the actors in this sector to achieve the stated purposes above. 

 

Given the nature of proposed technical approach and sensitivity of working with the independent 
media, USAID support should be provided through an assistance mechanism. USAID intends to 
provide funds to an eligible organization that has experience and already implements its own 
projects in the area of Media Development. A cooperative agreement (CA) is the preferred 
instrument since it allows for substantial involvement of USAID in ensuring the program’s 
effectiveness and coordination with other programs working in intersecting sectors and areas of 
interest. USAID has published Request for Information in support of the Activity design which 
has confirmed the relevance and focus of the Activity's technical areas, and availability of 
implementers to perform the work. 

 

END OF SECTION B 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

U.S. and non-US organizations may participate under this NOFO. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. USAID will not accept applications from individuals. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant(s) may be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective recipient has the 
necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or 
ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the 
terms and conditions of the award 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

2. COST SHARING OR MATCHING 

 

Cost sharing is suggested, but not required. Such funds may be provided directly by the recipient; 
other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors; host governments; and local organizations, 
communities and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of 
activities at the country level. This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or 
other facilities or equipment which may be used for the program, provided by the recipient. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and cooperative agreements see 2 CFR 200.306. 

 

3. OTHER 

 

In support of the Agency’s interest in fostering a larger assistance base and expanding the number 
and sustainability of development partners, USAID encourages applications from potential new 
partners. 

 

When considering making an award to a potential partner with limited or no previous USAID 
experience, USAID will undertake necessary pre‐award reviews to determine the organization’s 
“responsibility” as discussed below. The resultant award to this organization may take some time. 
The applicant should take this into account and plan their implementation dates and activities 
accordingly. 

 


“Responsibility” of Applicant: 

 

In order for an award to be made, the Agreement Officer must make an affirmative determination 
that the applicant is “responsible.” A positive responsibility determination means that the 
applicant possesses or has the ability to obtain the necessary management and technical 
competence to plan and carry out the program to be funded, and that the applicant will practice 
mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. 

 

END OF SECTION C


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT 


 

Name: Maya Chelidze 

Title: Sr. Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

Email: mchelidze@usaid.gov AND rcocaucasus@usaid.gov 

Mail Address: Regional Contracting Office, 29, Georgian American Friendship Avenue, 
Tbilisi 0131 Georgia 

 

2. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to Maya Chelidze via email at 
mchelidze@usaid.gov AND rcocaucasus@usaid.gov, no later than the date and time indicated 
on the cover letter. Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO 
will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, 
if that information is necessary for submitting applications or if the lack of it would be 
prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. PREPARATION OF APPLICATIONS 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: The Technical Application and the Business (Cost) 
Application. This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full 
application. Please see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to 
the Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address 
technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and 
address risk and other related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

• Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
• Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 
alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone 
number and email address); 
• Program name; 
• Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 
• Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303); 
• Organization DUNS number. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied 


by evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to 
the issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as 
part of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

• USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
• Written in English. 
• Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page with consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and Applicant’s name. 
• 10 point font can be used for graphs, charts and text boxes. Tables must comply with the 
12 point Times New Roman requirement. 
• Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in unlocked Microsoft Excel format. 
• The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
• The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
• The cost application must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do 
so may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

Excluding the cover page, table of contents, past performance, budget and annexes, the 
Technical Application must not exceed 20 pages. 

 

The Cost/Business Application is to be submitted under separate cover from the technical 
application. The Applicant is requested to submit a budget broken down by program years (in 
MS Excel with formulas unlocked) with an accompanying detailed budget narrative (in Word 
or PDF text accessible) which provides in detail the total costs for implementation of the 
program. 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose should mark the title page with 
the following legend: 

 


“This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government and 
shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose other than to 
evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this Applicant as a result of – or in 
connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government shall have the right to 
duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting grant. This restriction 
does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is 
obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

and mark each sheet of data it wished to restrict with the following legend: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

Name 

Title 

Email: 

Mail Address: 

 

 

4. APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications {will not be reviewed nor 
considered/may be considered at the discretion of the Agreement Officer}. Applicants must 
retain proof of timely delivery in the form of {system generated documentation of delivery receipt 
date and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt} 

 

Sample Language for email submission: 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to rcocaucasus@usaid.gov . Email submissions must 
include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an 
application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to 
the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments 
(e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first 
email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost 
Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 


the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same 
email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" 
email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

5. TECHNICAL APPLICATION FORMAT 

 

The technical application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection for 
award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The technical application should be specific, 
complete, and presented concisely. The Technical Application in response to this solicitation shall 
address how the Applicant intends to carry out the Program Description contained in Section A. It 
should clearly demonstrate how the Applicant will meet the goals and objectives of the program 
and fulfill the Applicant’s program implementation responsibilities. The application should take 
into account the requirements of the program and evaluation criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

Technical applications shall be organized by the technical evaluation criteria listed below as 
clarified further below. The Technical Application is limited to 20 pages. Any pages beyond these 
20 will NOT be evaluated. However, required Annexes specified below will not be counted 
towards the page limit. 

 

Required Order of the Technical Application: 

 

1. Cover page: The cover page must not exceed one page and must contain information as 
specified in Section D.3 for the cover page of the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications. 
(not included in the 20-page limit) 

2. Table of Contents (not included in the 20-page limit) 

3. Abbreviation list (not included in the 20-page limit) 

4. Executive summary (not included in the 20-page limit): must provide a maximum two-
page high-level overview of key elements of the Technical Application. 

5. Technical Approach (12-page limit) 

6. Partnerships Approach (4-page limit) 

6. Management and Staffing Approach (4-page limit) 

7. Required Annexes (not included in the 20-page limit) 

a. Illustrative First Year Work Plan (not to exceed 3 pages); 

b. A list of partners, including information on their capabilities and signed letters of 
commitment for any such partner organizations (exclusive commitments are not 
recommended); 

c. Résumés for Key Personnel (not to exceed 2 pages each); 

d. Letters of Commitment for Key Personnel (exclusive commitments are not 
recommended). 

 

 


1.1 Technical Approach 

The Technical Approach Section should include information sufficient to evaluate the application 
under the Technical Approach Criterion. This Section should address the overall approach to 
accomplish the objectives stated in the Program Description. 

 

The Technical Approach Section must include a clear description of the approach being proposed. 
More specifically, the technical approach should clearly incorporate and articulate: 1) actionable 
approaches to experiment, pilot and scale promising initiatives; 2) proactive, creative approaches 
to foster media and civil society convergence to catalyze community engagement; and 3) an 
actionable approach to purposeful networking of actors and efforts to increase coordination, 
collaboration, and cooperation within and between the media and civil society sectors to 
maximize the impact of advocacy. 

 

This section should include a clear description of the strategy and methodology to measure the 
impact and track progress towards achievement of the intended results. This section should also 
describe how proposed indicators will be used for timely management decisions and credibly 
reflect the actual performance of the activity. 

 

In addition to the information authorized in this Section, the following annexes are authorized: 

 

⮚Illustrative first year work plan 

 

1.2. Partnerships Approach 

 

The Partnerships Approach section should include information sufficient to evaluate the 
application under the Partnerships Approach criterion. This section should describe how the 
applicant will use and manage successful strategic partnerships with diverse stakeholders working 
on media and information issues, including local and regional organizations, private sector 
entities, and other donors, to achieve the goals of the activity. 

 

This section should discuss the capabilities of all partners and how they will apply them during 
implementation. This includes describing the unique capabilities, relationships, or other assets 
that the proposed partners bring that are relevant to achieving the objectives of the activity. 

 

In addition to the information authorized in this Section, the following annexes are authorized 

 

➢ A list of partners, including information on their capabilities and signed letters of 
commitment for any such partner organizations (exclusive commitments are discouraged) 


 

1.3 Management and Staffing Approach 

 

The Management and Staffing Approach section should include information sufficient to evaluate 
the application under the Management and Staffing Approach criterion. Applicants should 
address how the technical experience, operational assets, and organizational structure will 
advance activity objectives. 

 


a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 
b) SF 424 Form(s) 








This section should clearly articulate how the management approach will allow the program to 
adjust to unforeseen circumstances and developments flexibly and strategically. 

 

This section should address staffing/recruiting plans, and the plan to assemble technical assistance 
teams. Discussion of the organizational structure should include the program team, how each of 
the program components will be managed, roles and responsibilities of the proposed staff and 
lines of authority and accountability among staff and any proposed sub-awardees. 

 

This section must detail the qualifications and capacities of the Key Personnel. Applicants should 
address how the combined experience of the management team will advance activity objectives. 

 

In support of the Key Personnel section, the applicant will also provide resumes/CVs of key 
personnel and an organizational chart in an annex. Resumes/CVs for key personnel may not 
exceed 2 pages in length. Each key personnel resume/CV will include at least 3 references within 
the last 3 years, along with an email address and phone number for each reference. The references 
may be listed on a third page. 

 

The applicant should submit letters of commitment for key personnel in an Annex. Exclusive 
commitments are not recommended. 

 

In addition to the information authorized in this Section, the following annexes are authorized: 

 

⮚ Resumes and letters of commitment for the key personnel positions. 

 

 

6. BUSINESS (COST) APPLICATION FORMAT 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

 

 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 


c) Required Certifications and Assurances 











Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 
d) Budget and Budget Narrative 





 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to make the award and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative 
must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant 
must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such 
as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to 
support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

• Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template 



• Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
• Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken 
out by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430. The 
applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, and salary 
escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down 
by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in 
other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies 
on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific 
element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the 
rationale used and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of 
its approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant 
must propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the 
Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe 
benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. 
dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an 
attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost 
per unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment 
and supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the 
necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of 
comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the 
type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to 
any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity 



is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same 
requirements as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – not applicable 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. 
The applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences 
and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates 
of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or 
will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see 
Subpart E of 2 CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are 
requesting and provide the applicable supporting information. Below are the most 
commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 


 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA. 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an 
Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. 
Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award 
subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit 
Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, 
this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such 
time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal 
entity may apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it 
charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval 
is at the discretion of the AO. 

 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 


• Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates 
for the current year. 
• Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, 
personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than 
one program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year 
• Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across 
all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost 
to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

9) Cost Sharing – If the cost-share is proposed, the applicant should estimate the amount of 
cost-sharing resources to be provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of 
such resources, and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also 
provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions), if any, of all 
organizations involved in implementing the resulting award. 


 

e) Prior Approvals In Accordance With 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• DUNS Number 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 



• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not 
qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another 
applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

h) History of Performance 

 

In this section the Applicant (including all partners of a joint venture) must provide information 
regarding its recent history of performance for all of its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or 
cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, not to exceed seven (7) awards 
during the last five (5) years using the attached Past Performance Information (PPI) form (Annex 
2). The Applicant should provide information about a combined total of up to seven awards for 
itself and each major sub-applicant (defined as a sub-applicant whose proposed cost exceeds 10% 
of the applicant’s total proposed cost) in accordance with the following: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 


• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity including scope of work or complexity/diversity of tasks; 

• Period of Performance and primary location (s) of work; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last 3 years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

PPI must be submitted as an Annex to the Business (Cost) Application. 

 

USAID recommends that applicants alert the contacts that their names have been submitted and 
that they are authorized to provide performance information concerning the listed contracts if and 
when USAID requests it. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-
award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

Past Performance is not an evaluation factor under this solicitation; however, PPI will be 
reviewed as part of a Pre-Award Risk Assessment of the apparently successful Applicant. 

 

I. Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award. 

 

I.1 Branding Strategy Pre-Award Term 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it is 
promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 

 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 


portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 

 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, 
stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as 
found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section 
VI of the RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use 
of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 

(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 

(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 

(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of 
an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

 (3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

(iii)Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 
forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is 
from the American People.” 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 

 


(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, including 
any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if 
they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 

 

I.2 Marking Plan Pre-Award Term 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that 
will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with 
the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the 
Agency and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the 
RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, 
seal, or tagline. 

 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 

 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, 
media, or communications products funded by USAID; 


(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID 
Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge 
USAID and the support of the American people. 

 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and 
where the applicant will place the marking; 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of 
why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking 
requirements would: 

 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 
goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 

(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must 
explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each particular 
item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or product. 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 
or commodity would impair its functionality. 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 
must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or 
otherwise be inappropriate. 


(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the 
above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, 
the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

J. Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

K. Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. 
The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal 
considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and 
duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. Should 
the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the 
application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) 
calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 


The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware 
of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this 
financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding 
opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the applicant. 

END OF SECTION D 

 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. CRITERIA 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 


 

The application should represent the applicant’s best ideas and efforts, and clearly respond to the 
subject Program Description. USAID reserves right, but is not under obligation, to enter into 
discussions with one or more applicants in order to obtain clarifications, additional details, or to 
suggest refinements in the proposed technical approach, budget, or other aspects of application, if 
doing so is determined to be in the best interest of the U.S. Government. 

 

Applicants must note that these factors serve as the standard against which all technical 
information will be evaluated and serve to identify the significant matters which applications must 
address. Strength of Technical Approach, Strength of Partnerships Approach, and Strength of 
Management and Staffing Approach, in that order of importance stated below, as described herein 
and prescribed by the Technical Application format. 

 

Applications will be reviewed by USAID direct hire and personal service contractors. The 
decision to issue an award vest with the Agreement Officer. 

 

3. MERIT REVIEW 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the criteria shown 
below. 

 

The Selection Committee (SC) will evaluate the various components of the application set forth 
below in the stated order of importance. 

 

1. Strength of Technical Approach (Most Important) 

2. Strength of Partnerships Approach (Second Most Important, equally important as 3rd criterion) 


3. Strength of Management and Staffing Approach (Second Most Important, equally important as 
2nd criterion). 

 

The result of the SC’s evaluation, using the Merit Review Criterion above will be used to 
determine the apparently successful applicant(s). A final risk assessment, including a review of 
cost and performance history, will then determine the final award(s) decisions. 

 

Additional guidance on the Merit Review Criteria are set forth below. 

 

Evaluation Criterion No. 1, Strength of Technical Approach (Most Important): 

There are no sub-criteria listed under this criterion: 

 

The Technical Approach will be evaluated in terms of overall quality and the extent to which the 
proposed technical approach demonstrates a clear understanding of the objectives of the program 
and a convincing approach to achieve meaningful results. This includes, but is not limited to, the 
following considerations (not sub-criteria): 

● The extent to which the approach effectively incorporates experimentation to pilot and 
scale promising initiatives; 
● The extent to which the technical approach incorporates proactive, creative approaches to 
foster how media and civil society can converge to catalyze community engagement; 
● The extent to which the technical approach incorporates purposeful networking of actors 
and efforts to increase coordination, collaboration, and cooperation within and between 
the media and CSO sectors to maximize advocacy efforts; 
● The extent to which the strategy and methodology clearly demonstrate how the program 
elements (inputs), monitoring and evaluation, and collaborating, learning, and adapting 
will lead to the intended results. 


 

Evaluation Criterion No.2, Strength of Partnerships Approach (Second Most Important, 
equally important as 3rd criterion): 

There are no sub-criteria listed under this criterion: 

 

The Partnership Approach will be evaluated in terms of overall quality and the extent to which the 
application demonstrates the following considerations: 

● A clear articulation of an approach to managing successful strategic partnerships with 
diverse stakeholders working on media and information issues, including local and 
regional organizations, private sector entities, and other donors; 
● The capacity, technical strength, diversity, and suitability of the partners proposed based 
on the role identified for the respective partner. 


 

Evaluation Criterion No. 3, Strength of Management and Staffing Approach (Second Most 
Important, equally important as 2nd criterion) : 

There are no sub-criteria listed under this criterion: 

 

The Management and Staffing Approach will be evaluated in terms of overall quality and the 
extent to which it presents an effective means to successfully implement the technical approach 
and achieve objectives. This includes the following considerations: 


 

● It clearly articulates and effectively integrates a flexible management approach to allow 
the program to strategically adjust to unforeseen circumstances and developments; 
● The quality and experience of proposed key personnel collectively evidences a qualified 
project management and technical team; and 
● The professional references collected by USAID strongly support the candidate’s ability to 
successfully accomplish the requirements of the position. 


 

4. BUSINESS REVIEW 

 

The cost application of the apparently successful applicant will be evaluated by the Agreement 
Officer for completeness, realism, reasonability and allocability. 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

USAID/Georgia Mission will be responsible for the negotiation and obligation, and subsequent 
management and administration, of award which develop from successful application. The 
Mission Agreement Officer will be responsible for conducting negotiations, making the awards, 
and obligating costs to the recommended partner(s). He/she will only do so after making a 
positive risk assessment or responsibility determination that the applicant possesses, or has the 
ability to obtain, the necessary management competence in planning and carrying out assistance 
programs and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and 
other assets provided by USAID. The Agreement Officer will also designate an Agreement 
Officer Representative (AOR) to assist in the technical management and oversight of the award. 
The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

For Public International Organizations: Chapter 308 of USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS), including the Standard Provisions set forth in ADS 308.3.14. ADS Chapter 308: 
http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/308. 

 

Please see USAID’s ADS Sections 303.4 and 303.5. The actual Standard Provisions included in 
the award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

See Annex 3 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

Authority to Obligate the Government: The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may 


legally commit the Government to the expenditures of public funds. No costs chargeable to the 
proposed Cooperative Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Cooperative Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

3.1 Financial Reporting: 

 

Financial Reports must be submitted in accordance with 2 CFR 200.327 for U.S. organizations, 
and for Non-U.S. organizations financial reports will be required at a frequency depending on 
method of payment, but at least quarterly. Reporting requirements, such as the format, number of 
copies, information to be included, due dates and distribution will be finalized in consultation 
with the Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) after the issuance of the award. 

 

(1) The recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a quarterly basis via 
electronic format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov). The recipient must submit a copy of the FFR at the same time to the 
Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and to the Agreement Officer. 

The recipient must submit quarterly financial reports no later than 30 calendar days after the end 
of each reporting period. The following reporting period end dates shall be used for interim 
reports: 3/31, 6/30, 9/30, or 12/31. 

 

(2) The recipient must submit the original and two copies of all final financial reports to 
USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMPLOC Unit, the AOR and to the Agreement Officer. The 
recipient must submit an electronic version of the final Federal Financial Form (SF-425) to U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services in accordance with paragraph (1) above. 

 

The recipient must submit the final financial report no later than 90 calendar days from the end of 
the agreement. 

 

The quarterly financial reports must contain a summary page which shows spending by category 
for the quarter, cumulative spending to date by line item, available funding for the remainder of 
the activity and any variances from planned expenditures. If there are significant accrued 
expenditures for the quarter being reported upon which for some reason have not yet been billed 
to the agreement, the recipient must include a brief note to that effect, with the specific amount 
involved, thus enabling the AOR to accurately track the expenditure rate. 

 

3.2 Performance Reporting 

 

3.2.1. Annual Work Plans: 

 

Annual work plans (AWP) are developed yearly and include proposed activities for the given 
year, time-frame, implementation of activities, budget, review of the previous year’s 
accomplishments, problems and challenges encountered in achieving specified results, proposed 
annual outputs, and progress towards achieving results. 

 


The USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) will approve work plans and any 
revisions to them that entail a change in or additional activities. The first work plan will be due 
thirty days after the signing of the award and should cover the time from the date of the award 
through the end of USG Fiscal Year Q4. Subsequent annual work plans will be due to USAID 60 
days prior to the start of USG Fiscal Year Q1 unless an alternative schedule is agreed to by both 
USAID and the recipient. 

 

3.2.2. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan: 

 

The recipient must submit an activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) plan within 
sixty calendar days of the award date. 

 

The MEL Plan will include sections with the following elements: 

 

● The results framework or other visualization, that clearly articulates the causal relationship 
between activity outputs and outcomes/expected results. 
● A set of performance indicators that measures each output and outcome/expected result. 
● Identification of key assumptions in the theory of change and a description of how those 
will be monitored. 
● Performance Indicators Reference Sheets (PIRs), which include a definition and detailed 
description of the performance indicators to be tracked including: unit of measure; data 
source; method of data collection; justification/management utility; baseline values; 
annual targets; annual actual data; frequency and schedule for data collection; individual 
responsibility for data collection and availability of data; and detailed plans for data 
analysis, review and reporting. 
● Tracking table for all indicators. 
● A detailed description of how data will be collected (including baselines), managed, 
analyzed (e.g. vis-à-vis targets), and utilized in decision-making on a routine basis by 
management; 
● Plans for collaborating with any external evaluations planned by the Mission; 
● Any proposed internal evaluations; 
● Learning activities, including knowledge capture at activity close out; 
● Estimated resources for these monitoring, evaluation and learning activities that are a part 
of the implementing partner’s budget; and 
● Roles and responsibilities for all proposed monitoring, evaluation and learning actions. 


 

The Activity MEL Plan should be revised as needed in response to changes in the activity or 
context that occur during the life of the activity. 

 

The Recipient and USAID must agree upon the final choice of performance indicators useful for 
timely management decisions and credibly reflecting the actual performance of the project. MEL 
data must meet USAID’s quality standards of validity, reliability, timeliness, precision and 
integrity, and should be disaggregated by sex and geographic location as appropriate and feasible. 

The recipient must prepare monitoring reports and related documentation for all activities under 
this agreement, as directed by the AOR. This documentation must include routine periodic reports 
on indicator status. Annual monitoring reports must align to the U.S. fiscal year ending on 


September 30. The format of the reports and documentation may change from year-to-year and 
will be provided by the AOR. Verification of specific data calculations for all indicators must be 
conducted annually. Major M&E activities (e.g. annual internal Data Quality Assessments, 
routine surveys, quarterly data entry into USAID’s management information system, etc.) should 
also appear in the annual Work Plan. 

 

3.2.3. Quarterly Performance Reports: 

 

Within 30 days after the end of each quarter of the USG Fiscal Year, the Recipient shall provide a 
quarterly performance report which will document overall progress towards the sub-purposes of 
the project, activities completed during the reporting period, any problems and challenges 
encountered during implementation (including financial issues) and how they were mitigated, 
data on all indicators established in the MEL Plan, and specific activities planned for the next 
quarterly reporting period. The format of the progress reports will be determined in consultation 
with the AOR. 

 

3.2.4. Annual Reports: 

 

The fourth quarterly report serves as the annual report to USAID – thus, it is more extensive and 
contains more information than a quarterly report. Annual Reports should reflect the structure of 
the annual work plan. Annual is defined according to the U.S. Government’s Fiscal Year: October 
1st to September 30th. The Annual Report must be submitted to the USAID by October 31 of 
each year. In addition to the requirements of the Quarterly Report, the Annual Report must also: 

 

● Describe overall performance against targets and goals during the fiscal year, and why 
targets and goals were not achieved or why they were exceeded. Discuss problems and 
challenges and how they may affect out-year planning. 
● Provide a table displaying the indicators the Recipient is responsible for reporting on and 
the indicator values for the year, along with prior year values and future year targets. It 
should also include explanations for any indicator values falling above or below target. 
● Provide illustrative activities to demonstrate whether the overall goals of the project are 
being achieved. 
● Identify prospects for achieving longer term impact where applicable. 


 

3.2.5. Final Report: 

 

The recipient shall prepare a final report on the award in lieu of the final quarterly performance 
report. The final report must be submitted no later than 90 days after the end of the award. 

The final report will clearly describe major accomplishments and results achieved attributable to 
activities under this award, an account of the sustainability of these efforts and/or results, final 
data for indicators in the performance management plan, an account of any problems encountered 
during implementation (including financial issues), and lessons learned and/or best practices 
identified during implementation. 

 

The final report must be submitted to the Agreement Officer’s Representative, to the Agreement 
Officer, and to USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) electronically. 


3.2.6. Close-out Plans: 

 

Six (6) months prior to the completion of activities and/or the award end date, the recipient must 
submit a close-out plan for the award. 

 

3.3 Gender Reporting 

As part of its regular reports, the recipient must collect, analyze and submit sex disaggregated 
data and propose actions that will address any gender-related challenges that might arise from that 
data. The recipient will report any challenges to the AOR who, in turn, will work with the USAID 
Mission’s gender specialist to find reasonable solutions. 

3.4 Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements 

a) Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 

1) The recipient must provide the Agreement Officer’s Representative one copy of any 
Intellectual Work that is published, and a list of any Intellectual Work that is not published. 

2) In addition, the recipient must submit Intellectual Work, whether published or not, to the DEC 
on-line. The recipient must review the DEC Web site for submission instructions, including 
document formatting and the types of documents to submit. Submission instructions can be found 
at: http://dec.usaid.gov . 

3) For purposes of submissions to the DEC, Intellectual Work includes all works that document 
the implementation, evaluation, and results of international development assistance activities 
developed or acquired under this award, which may include program and communications 
materials, evaluations and assessments, information products, research and technical reports, 
progress and performance reports required under this award (excluding administrative financial 
information), and other reports, articles and papers prepared by the recipient under the award, 
whether published or not. The term does not include the recipient’s information that is incidental 
to award administration, such as financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management 
information. 

4) Each document submitted should contain essential bibliographic information, such as (1) 
descriptive title; (2) author(s) name; (3) award number; (4) sponsoring USAID office; (5) 
development objective; and (6) date of publication. 

5) The recipient must not submit to the DEC any financially sensitive information or personally 
identifiable information, such as social security numbers, home addresses and dates of birth. Such 
information must be removed prior to submission. The recipient must not submit classified 
documents to the DEC. 

b. In the event award funds are used to underwrite the cost of publishing, in lieu of the publisher 
assuming this cost as is the normal practice, any profits or royalties up to the amount of such cost 
must be credited to the award unless the schedule of the award has identified the profits or 
royalties as program income. 

 


 

3.5. Geographic Information System (GIS) Reporting 

1. Activity Location Data: The recipient must provide the AOR and Mission GIS Specialist with 
Activity Location Data semi-annually on April 15 and October 15. For this purpose, the recipient 
must fill in the appropriate Excel Spreadsheet “Activity Location Data GIS Report Template.” 
This template will be provided by the USAID/Caucasus Program Office. 

2. Performance Indicators: The recipient must submit annually data for several key Performance 
Indicators that measure the most significant results (outcomes and outputs/deliverables) of the 
activity by region, municipality, town or village. This data must be submitted no later than 
November 15 each year and must reflect the results for the previous fiscal year disaggregated by 
geographic location. The recipient must work closely with the AOR to review the activity-level 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan to identify jointly key Performance Indicators that reflect 
and convey the most important results achieved or to be achieved. USAID is interested in 
Performance Indicators in the M&E plan that can be meaningfully disaggregated by geographic 
location. The number of these indicators will depend upon the complexity of the activity and 
could range in number approximately from 1 to 10. For this purpose, the recipient must fill in the 
appropriate Excel Spreadsheet “Performance Indicators GIS Report Template.” This template will 
be provided by the USAID/Caucasus Program Office. 

3. Geographic Data: If created or acquired under this award, the recipient must provide annually 
on October 15 to the AOR and mission GIS Specialist any of the following types of Geographic 
Data: 

● thematic data such as social and economic statistics at municipality level, poverty data, 
demographic and health indicators, land use, land cover, hydrology, and transportation 
infrastructure; USAID prefers to receive this data in GIS standard formats, however standard 
database formats are also allowed (e.g. poverty data can be submitted as an Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheet.); 

● activity specific geographic data such as the analytical output of a geographic analysis that 
is conducted while implementing the activity and is useful to USAID’s development planning 
and project design purposes; or 

● any other geographic data, such as cartographic products (e.g. maps, geographic data 
visualizations), aerial and satellite imagery created or acquired under this award. Cartographic 
products submitted to USAID must be in industry standard Esri Map Document .mxd format 
and in high resolution .jpg or .pdf formats. All data contained in the .mxd must be submitted 
according to the Geographic Data standards outlined in next paragraph. 

 

4. Geographic Data submitted to USAID under this paragraph must be in industry standard 
formats such as Shapefile (.shp) or in a File Geodatabase and include metadata. Metadata is a 
summary document providing content, quality, type, creation, and spatial information about a 
data set. It represents who, what, when, where, why and how of the resource. Metadata can be 
stored in any format such as a text file, Extensible Markup Language (XML), or database 
record. Metadata records include core library catalog elements such as Title, Abstract, and 
Publication Data; geographic elements such as Geographic Extent and Projection Information; 
and database elements such as Attribute Label Definitions and Attribute Domain Values. 



Geographic Data must be projected to the Geographic Coordinate System World Geodetic 
System 1984 (GCS WGS 1984). All data must use the World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 
1984) datum. 


3.6 Program Income 

Program income, if any will be generated under the award, will be treated under the award in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.307 or, for non-U.S. organizations, see the standard provision 
“Program Income.” 

3.7 Branding & Marking: 

It is a federal statutory and regulatory requirement (see Section 641, Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended, 2 CFR 700.16 and 22 CFR 226.91) that all USAID programs, projects, 
activities, public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under a 
USAID grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award or sub-award must be marked 
appropriately overseas with the USAID identity. In accordance with ADS 320.3.3 Branding and 
Marking Requirements for Assistance Awards USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, 
activities, public communications, or commodities implemented or delivered under co-funded 
instruments – such as grants, cooperative agreements, or other assistance awards that usually 
require a cost share – generally are “co-branded and co-marked.” 

The successful applicant will be required to submit a branding strategy and marking plan. The 
Applicant may request a presumptive exemption to marking requirements established in 22 CFR 
226.91 and 2 CFR 700.16. More information on Branding strategy and Marking plan are available 
at http://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/branding/assistance-awards . 

The branding strategy and marking plan will become a material element of the cooperative 
agreement. Information on USAID’s branding “assistance” applies to this RFA. ADS Chapter 320 
sections concerning “acquisition” do not apply to this RFA. ADS Chapter 320 can be found on 
USAID website: http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/320.pdf . 

3.8 Environmental Compliance 

1a) The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/ ), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. Contractor environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this contract. 

1b) In addition, the contractor must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter will govern. 

1c) No activity funded under this contract will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 


determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 
Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 
(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

2) An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) describing the successful activity's purpose, 
location, duration and intensity; considering alternatives; and assessing impacts, including 
cumulative impacts, in light of existing and proposed activities will be prepared as a part of 
review and approval process in accordance with USAID Environmental Procedures. The 
Environmental Compliance requirements will be developed and incorporated into the award based 
on the IEE. 

END OF SECTION F 

 



 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

See Section D, Paragraph 1. 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

END OF SECTION G 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

END OF SECTION H 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

The applicant is required to submit the SF-424A. In addition, the applicant must submit a detail 
and summary budget in Section D.2.d., according to the following suggested format: 

 

 

Budget Item 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

 

 

Year 5 

Total 
USAID 

Cost 
Share (if 
proposed) 

Total Project 

Personnel (Salaries and 
Allowances) 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Fringe Benefits 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Travel and Transportation 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Procurement of Equipment 
and Supplies 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Contractual/Subagreements 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Other Direct Cost 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Total Direct Costs 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

Indirect Costs 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

 $ 



 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 

 

 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

X 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 

 

 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 




 

 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

X 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 

X 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 




 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

X 

 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

 

 

 

 


