 

A picture containing text, clipart
Description automatically generated 


Issue Date: October 24, 2022 

Deadline for Question: November 8, 2022 

Closing Date: December 9, 2022 

Closing Time: 18:00, Yerevan Time (UTC +4) 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72011123RFA00001 

 

Program Title: Media Integrity and Resilience in Armenia Activity 

 

Federal Assistance Listing Number: 98.001 

 

To Whom It May Concern: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the Media Integrity and Resilience in 
Armenia Activity. Eligibility for this award is not restricted; both qualified U.S. and non-US 
organizations are eligible to apply. 

 

USAID intends to make one award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 


Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted 
at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

Abdullah Akbar 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Armenia 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS .................................................................................................................. 3 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................... 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION .................................................................... 20 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION .............................................................................. 25 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ......................................... 27 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ........................................................... 45 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ................................. 47 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) ............................................... 60 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION ........................................................................................ 61 
ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE ......................................................................... 62 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS ....................................................................................... 65 
ANNEX 3: INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) ............................................. 68 
ANNEX 4: ASSISTANCE BRANDING STRATEGY, MARKING PLAN AND STRATEGIC 
COMMUNICATION PLAN GUIDANCE ..................................................................................... 69 
[END OF NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY] ................................................................... 74 


 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

I. INTRODUCTION 


The Media Integrity and Resilience in Armenia Activity is a five-year activity that aims to 
strengthen the integrity of the information space in Armenia. The activity will enhance the 
professional and organizational capacity of media outlets to strengthen their editorial 
independence and increase their reach and impact across Armenian society through quality 
content. This Activity will provide catalytic support to improve the financial viability of 
editorially independent media and help institutionalize a funding source for public interest media. 
While addressing fundamental challenges in Armenia’s legal and regulatory framework for the 
operation of independent media, the activity will advance media literacy efforts to empower 
citizens and civic and political leaders to consume and engage with information critically and 
understand the role of ethical media in holding the government accountable. This Activity is 
expected to lead to an environment where the media has greater capacity to fulfill its watchdog 
role over the government, and the space for informed dialogue is expanded. 

II. BACKGROUND 


The 2018 Velvet Revolution set the stage for a more positive political environment for opening 
the media space in Armenia, with a more transparent government, greater freedom of speech, and 
reduction of state control of the media. Despite the relative freedom of expression, the 2018 
political transition promise to expand the operational space for independent media is yet to 
materialize. The COVID-19 pandemic and, particularly, the deep socio-political crisis that ensued 
after the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh (NK) hostilities greatly impacted the media environment, 
which is characterized by an increase in fake and unverified reporting, manipulative narratives, 
and hate speech. The sharp drop in public trust toward official information sources and media due 
to the extensive disinformation and propaganda during the NK hostilities has not improved. 
Further, with the government’s inability to ensure effective strategic communication on key 
reforms and overall decreased press availability, social media—filled with unverified information, 
rumors, and news based on unnamed secondary sources—often serves as the main platform to set 
the agenda and tone for political discourse. Mirroring the current socio-political divide in the 
country, the overall media landscape has become deeply polarized and politicized. 

Various international press freedom reports recognize the growth of Armenia’s media space, at 
the same time capturing persisting challenges and emerging alarming signs. The 2021 Vibrant 
Information Barometer (VIBE) report ranked Armenia’s information space as “somewhat 
vibrant,” yet the contributing panelists “believed that nonpartisan news and information sources 
are rather exceptions than a rule, and unfortunately independent voices usually do not enjoy big 
audiences.”1 The 2022 Press Freedom Index of the Reporters without Borders, which ranked 

1 https://www.irex.org/sites/default/files/pdf/vibe-armenia-2021.pdf 


Notice of Funding Opportunity Number (NOFO): 72011123RFA00001,
MediaIntegrity and Resilience in ArmeniaActivity

Armenia 51st among 180 countries, assessed Armenia’s media environmentas pluralistic yetpolarized and pointed to the “serious threats to journalists” brought on by the government’srecentlegal reforms to addressdisinformation.2 The 2022 Freedom of the World Armenia chapteralso 
noted the several new restrictions that the government imposed “on journalistic freedoms in 2021, 
including limiting the free movement of journalists in the parliament.”3

These reports and otherexpert assessments outline a number of gaps in the country’s mediaenvironment. While there area handful of independent online news outlets that perform theirwatchdog function, most traditional and online media outlets pursue a partisan editorial policy in 
line with their political and commercial affiliations. Public television refrains from criticizing theauthorities, which many see as afailure on the government’s commitment to reform the publicbroadcaster. With mediabecoming more polarized and politicized, depleted public trust4 toward 
professional mediaand anti-media rhetoricfrom ruling and opposition political actors alike lead 
to self-censorship and a non-conducivework environment for journalists. The small and 
underdeveloped advertising market and politicization of funding present serious challenges for thefinancial independence of private outlets and traditional business models for media. The legal-
regulatory climate does not correspond to currentneeds and demands of the sector. Finally, 
sophistication and unprecedented levels of disinformation, both internal and external, and 
insufficient media literacy present significant vulnerabilities in the news and information space.

In the past decade, USAID/Armenia’s support to media development through the AlternativeResources in Media(2010-2014) and the Media forInformed Citizen Engagement (2014-2022)
activities focused on empowering independent voices and increasing access to alternative sourcesof information in a controlled media environment; strengthened media support organizations formedia reform; promotedself-regulation ethics mechanisms among interested media outlets; built 
the skills of media professionals to keep up with the emerging needs and demands of theprofession; promoted content production on specialized topics and reforms, and fostered fact-
checking and media literacy to counter disinformation. These activities achieved significantprogress in advancing some media outlets’ ability to produce quality and specialized content in 
multimedia formats; however, the operational resilience of these outlets remains highly dependenton donor assistance, and the content that is produced is proving insufficient to counterbalance the 
unprecedented levels ofdisinformation flowing across the different influential information 
channels, including traditional and social media. USAID’s media literacy efforts strengthened 
critical thinking and improved understanding ofethical journalism among youth and young 
adults, fostered the skills and appreciation of media literacy among teachers, and contributed to 
the incorporation of media and digital literacy in state standardsfor secondary education. There isa need to build on and institutionalize these achievements to address theexponentially growing 
vulnerabilities to disinformation on the news consumers’ side.

Recognizing the vital role independent reporting plays in keeping citizensinformed, enabling 
public dialogue, and holding the government accountable, USAID is committed to advancing 
deeperreforms, key processes, institutions, and capacities to expand theconducive environment

2https://rsf.org/en/country/armenia3Freedom in the World 2022:Armenia, Section D, accessed June 22,2022,

https://freedomhouse.org/country/armenia/freedom-world/2022

4According to the2022 Caucasus Barometer data, Armenians ranked the media as the least trusted institution.

5 


for the operation of independent media and improve the integrity of the information space in 
Armenia. This Activity will tackle the following gaps in the current development context. 

Professionalism and Ethical Standards: Formal journalism education does not meet the current 
needs of the profession. Numerous journalism degree programs exist at private and public 
institutions; however, most do not provide hands-on or specialized training and sufficient skills to 
prepare entrants for the profession and the challenges and opportunities for new media and new 
technology. There is limited niche reporting, and issue expertise that is necessary for informative, 
in-depth, and fact-based reporting is lacking. Outlets have few resources for capacity-building to 
address existing gaps. Professional growth and training opportunities for content producers are 
mainly available through media support organizations. Lack of wide acceptance of and 
compliance with ethical standards, editorial policies and content production driven by political 
and business interests, and the pressure to keep up with the pace of social media are among the 
factors compounding the media’s professional capacity and integrity gaps. 

Media Management and Financial Viability: Financial constraints, including a small, saturated 
market with a limited advertising pool, are a serious stumbling block to the media sector’s ability 
to operate independently. As summarized in VIBE, “[s]ufficient financial resources are not 
available to most editorially independent professional content producers.”5 Content producers that 
do not lack resources usually lack editorial independence as they mostly serve the political 
agendas of those who provide the resources. Changes in the regulation of the advertising market 
have impacted the media sector negatively. The ban on advertising of gambling and bookmaking 
companies has deprived media outlets of the largest share of their income. The adoption of 
amendments to the Law on Television and Radio and the Law on Advertising, which allows 
public television to earn revenue from commercial advertisements, put smaller media at an even 
greater disadvantage. The shrinking advertising market has also been rapidly shifting from 
television to new and social media. The sector’s overall lack of resources means that it is unable 
to develop and implement business plans or experiment with innovative revenue-generating 
models such as paid subscription, content monetization, etc. Nor do most media outlets have the 
resources to invest in market research to tailor products to audience needs. 

5 https://www.irex.org/sites/default/files/pdf/vibe-armenia-2021.pdf, p. 5 

6 https://www.irex.org/sites/default/files/pdf/vibe-armenia-2021.pdf, p. 7 

7 Removed from the Criminal Code as of July 1, 2022. 

Legal and Regulatory Environment: The legal environment for freedom of speech is generally 
considered enabling, and people’s right to create, access, share, and consume information is 
largely unencumbered.6 At the same time, the government has backslid on its promise to uphold 
freedom of the media by adopting a number of restrictive laws and decisions. These include: the 
three-fold increase in the fines for slander and defamation; more restrictive rules to control 
journalists’ access to the parliament and the parliamentarians, limitations on accreditation of 
journalists covering state institutions; and the now rescinded grave insults provision,7 which 
stipulated criminal charges for offending high-ranking officials and public figures. International 
and domestic human rights organizations have repeatedly called for a repeal of these controversial 
amendments, and local media experts have called out the government for initiating and adopting 
legislation—which they see as a means for the ruling party to shield itself from the opposition 
media and unwanted criticism—without duly consulting with the expert community. The legal 


framework regulating the media and information space, including the Law on Audiovisual Media 

Media Literacy: Armenia scored low on the 2021 VIBE report “Information Consumption and 
Engagement” principle, which looks at media literacy and media’s engagement with audience 
needs. There is political will to promote media and digital literacy as evidenced by the 
incorporation of media and digital literacy indicators in state standards for secondary education. 
The Media Literacy Handbook developed by the Media Initiatives Center (MIC) with USAID’s 
support has been endorsed as a core resource by the Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, and 
Sports. At the same time, practical operationalization of these standards across disciplines 
continues to present methodological and resource challenges. According to the 2021 media 
consumption study conducted by the Caucasus Research Resource Center (CRRC) Armenia, 
television is no longer the primary source of information in Armenia, and the daily viewership of 
national channels decreased from 72 percent in 2019 to 59 percent in 2021. Sixty-seven percent of 
the respondents reported online resources and social media as their primary source of information, 
with forty-four percent of respondents admitting that they never check the links they access. The 
findings indicate a decline in responsible news consumption as compared to a 2019 survey by the 
Advanced Public Research Group (APRG), according to which 29 percent admitted they never 
check the information they receive.8 As summarized in VIBE, due to the low levels of media 
literacy, “people’s views on political or social issues are not often shaped by quality information 
but rather by misinformation, populism, and demagogy.”9 Left unchecked, the spread of 
disinformation could undermine the country’s tenuous progress on meaningful democratic 
reforms. 

8 Advanced Public Research Group, http://aprgroup.org/images/Library/NED_report/presentation_2019-0477-
2_arm_q_eng_sa_rs_rs.pdf 

9 https://www.irex.org/sites/default/files/pdf/vibe-armenia-2021.pdf, p. 12 

III. ACTIVITY GOAL, OBJECTIVES, AND LINKAGES TO USAID’S STRATEGIC 
DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES 


The overall goal of the activity is to strengthen the integrity of the information space in Armenia. 
It aims to enhance the professional and organizational capacity of media outlets to strengthen 
their editorial independence and increase their reach and impact across Armenian society through 
quality content. The activity also aims to provide catalytic support to improve the financial 
viability of editorially independent media and help institutionalize a funding source for public 
interest media. While addressing fundamental challenges in the legal and regulatory framework 
for the operation of independent media in Armenia, the activity will advance media literacy to 
empower citizens and civic and political leaders to consume and engage with information 
critically and understand the role of responsible media in holding the government accountable. 

The goal of the activity will thus be achieved through the following three objectives: 

1. Enhance journalistic standards and content quality 



2. Catalyze financial viability of public interest media 
3. Foster enabling environment for independent information flow 


It is hypothesized that IF: (1) existing and emerging independent media actors adhere to 
journalistic ethics and advance high professional standards in producing quality content, (2) 
outlets and entities are able to improve their financial viability, and (3) support organizations and 
political actors are able to advance critical media reforms, and the general public understands the 
value of fact-based journalism and discerns disinformation from verified content; THEN the 
integrity of the information space will be strengthened, enabling the government and non-
governmental actors to engage in informed policy making and citizens to use quality information 
to inform their action, thus supporting good governance and enhancing democratic consolidation. 

The activity directly aligns with sub-intermediate result 1.2.3 “Media integrity increased” of 
USAID/Armenia’s 2020-2025 Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) Results 
Framework and contributes to sub-intermediate result 1.2.1 “Civic and political participation 
increased,” thus leading to intermediate result 1.2 “Citizen engagement for democratic 
consolidation increased,” which in turn advances the CDCS Development Objective 1 
“Democratic transition advanced.” The activity’s approach closely fits the development 
hypothesis underlying DO 1, which is IF effective and accountable governance is institutionalized 
by strengthening the rule of law, political representation, and the capacity and commitment to 
implement democratic reforms, and IF citizen engagement for democratic consolidation is 
increased, THEN Armenia will advance its democratic transition and be more resilient to malign 
influence. 

An improved information ecosystem is critical to the success of an inclusive and participatory 
approach to democratic development. Increased access to accurate, trustworthy, and high-quality 
information will contribute to an informed debate and more inclusive deliberation within 
Armenian society. Improved newsroom management and greater financial viability will ensure 
that media actors are better positioned to be independent from outside influence and better able to 
operate as businesses. Finally, a more professional, well-regulated news and information sector, 
buttressed by a public that is better informed and inoculated against disinformation, will lead to a 
more resilient Armenia vis-a-vis internal and external malign influence. 

IV. DETAILED ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION 

The activity will operate according to the Results Framework and parameters outlined below and 
Operating Principles described in Section V. The underlying approach and illustrative indicators 
are summarized under each Objective and Expected Result (ER). 


 

Diagram
Description automatically generated with low confidence
Media and Information Ecosystem: The activity is expected to conduct a baseline and regular 
media ecosystem analyses to stay current on the operating dynamics and identify/update target 
audiences, institutions, and processes for the activity. This foundation exercise is expected to 
inform the identification of existing editorially independent media and emerging media actors that 
are best positioned to institute positive and lasting progress with the support of the activity. It will 
also help ground-truth the relevance of planned interventions in the local context. 

Media Market and Consumer Research: To inform interventions across Objectives 1-3, the 
activity is expected to commission regular public surveys (at least a baseline, mid-point, and end-
of-project) and other relevant research to assess audience behavior, market opportunities, news 
and information consumption habits, and the level of media literacy among the general public. 

Grants Pool: To complement the diverse capacity and network building technical assistance, the 
activity is expected to operate a responsive grants program to contribute to the achievement of 
Objectives 1-3. No less than $4 million will be allocated for the responsive grants pool during the 
course of the five-year activity. The administration of a portion of the grants pool may be 
transferred to the media support fund, as described under Objective 2. 

Target Beneficiaries: Assistance is expected to be available to all relevant media actors at the 
regional and national level, including journalists, editors, media managers, bloggers, and social 
media influencers, across different formats (electronic, digital, multimedia, etc.) and distribution 
channels identified through media ecosystem analysis. 

Internet Freedom: This activity must dedicate no less than $100,000 annually towards 
interventions that may be categorized as “Internet freedom” (this includes: assistance towards 
enhancing the digital safety capacities of journalists to exercise their human rights online and 
policy and advocacy support for an open and free Internet), and must coordinate closely with 
USAID’s Greater Internet Freedom Activity, which the Development, Democracy, and 
Innovation Bureau supports and also operates in Armenia. 


Objective 1: Enhance journalistic standards and content quality 

Poor quality of formal journalism education, pressure from financial and political interests, and 
low pay for journalists coupled with an increase in disinformation from internal and external 
actors contribute to the low quality of journalism and the public’s growing distrust in media. This 
objective will address gaps in professionalism and compliance with standards of ethical 
journalism. In particular, it will advance the media sector’s professional standards, including that 
journalists follow recognized and accepted ethical standards and that reporting–including 
specialized content–is accurate, evidence-based, and well-sourced. The activity is expected to 
foster high quality content on public-interest and underreported topics through technical 
assistance, capacity building, access to networks, and production grants. Applicants are expected 
to build on existing initiatives, encourage collaboration across support organizations, and 
incorporate sustainability of proposed interventions. 

ER 1.1: Adherence to professional and ethical standards of journalism improved 

Continuous professional development: Given the significant limitations of formal journalism 
education, reporters need ongoing access to training and guiding resources in ethics, multimedia 
tools, and creative production techniques to ensure relevance in a rapidly evolving field. 
Interventions are expected to develop sustainable, creative, and practical skills building 
mechanisms and increase access to professional development opportunities and cooperation 
networks to improve fundamental journalistic codes of conduct and standards of reporting, 
advance creative and user-friendly production techniques, enhance ability to produce and 
distribute content across relevant and emerging distribution channels, exposure to current media 
management approaches, improve digital safety of media actors, as well as foster continuing 
education on public interest topics and specialized fields of reporting identified through periodic 
media ecosystem analyses. This also includes development of guiding resources and model style 
guides for adaptation by the media to foster professional standards within newsrooms and 
facilitate coverage of specialized topics and marginalized groups. 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● DR.5.3-1: Number of non-state news outlets assisted by USG (required) 
● Number of media that have clear codes of ethics and professional editorial guidelines 
● The extent to which supported media are equipped to produce professional and locally 
relevant content and leverage creative reporting formats 


ER1.2: Fact-based coverage of priority topics increased 

Competitive sub-grant pool for quality content: To increase availability of and access to fact-
based quality information in Armenia’s media space, the activity is expected to include a grants 
pool to support content production on key issues, including socially relevant topics that facilitate 
citizens’ understanding of and participation in shaping public policy on the national and local 
level. This also entails support for investigative journalism, specialized reporting, and creative 
formats by established and emerging actors, including in storytelling and infotainment, as well as 
initiatives promoting collaborative reporting and content exchange. Key topics include but are not 
limited to governance reforms, economic growth, health, natural resource management, human 


rights, inclusion of vulnerable groups. Grants are also expected to support coverage of national 
and local elections and assistance for pre-election candidate debates. Demonstrated commitment 
and adherence to ethical standards fostered through ER 1.1 will be a key factor in determining 
grant recipients. 

Tailored Capacity Building: In addition to the broad-based assistance available through ER 1.1, 
sub-grants are expected to be accompanied by capacity building support, for example, through in-
house mentoring and tailored coaching, based on the identified needs of the recipient. The support 
should take a needs-based approach with beneficiaries expected to outline and address capacity 
gaps and measure progress over time. 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● DR.5.3-1: Number of non-state news outlets assisted by USG (required) 
● Level of adherence to ethical and professional standards among activity beneficiaries 
● Level of change in the overall amount of coverage of (or number of news products on) 
target topics of interest and marginalized groups in media supported (disaggregated by 
topic) 
● Quality of content produced by activity beneficiaries 


 

Objective 2. Catalyze competitiveness and financial viability of public interest media 

Financial constraints limit the independent media’s ability to compete with politically influenced 
content. The lack of skills, staff, and financial resources to analyze the demographics and interests 
of audiences further prevent media outlets from developing effective business strategies to 
provide news products and services to monetize content and expand audience reach. Although 
consumer revenue models are extremely rare in Armenia, the 2022 CRRC media consumption 
survey indicated that 13 percent of the respondents were willing to pay for trustworthy content, 
which was an increase from the 6 percent recorded in 2019. This positive trend, the growing share 
of digital advertising, and technology-based solutions for content monetization present a window 
of opportunity for catalytic support to build up business management and contribute to the 
financial viability of editorially independent media that serves the public interest. 

ER 2.1 Competitiveness of supported media improved 

Needs-driven solutions for business and audience growth: Technical assistance and material 
support will be available to the ER 1.2 beneficiaries to update, improve, and use a broader range 
of tools and platforms to expand the variety of online and digital content, and ultimately attract, 
retain, and deepen engagement with new audiences. Examples of such support may include but 
are not limited to: 

● Software for newsroom convergence, optimization of workstreams, video editing, and data 
visualization; 
● Access to customer relationship management tools and data; 
● Systems for linking data analytics, audience feedback, platform delivery, and content 
aggregation; 
● Upgrades to websites to support more interactive, multimedia content, like video 
streaming and improved mobile integration; 



● Equipment for live-streaming, creating podcasts, video editing, or capturing aerial footage. 


Tailored Business Management Support: Interventions are expected to target a smaller group 
of media outlets identified from among the beneficiaries supported under Objective 1 for tailored 
assistance to improve their business management and diversification of revenue sources and be 
better positioned to serve and grow a customer base. This assistance entails a business incubation 
approach with feasibility and organizational assessments, start-up support, and ongoing 
management and expert mentoring to improve business management in key areas, such as sales 
and revenue generation, newsroom development, audience measurement and analysis, and 
product development. Assistance is expected to help develop and scale up innovative and context-
relevant business models and/or consumer revenue models, such as paid subscription, 
crowdfunding, memberships, etc. To ensure the buy-in of the benefiting media and the potential 
long-term viability of proposed models, the solutions are expected to build in context-appropriate 
mechanisms for leveraging matching resources from the recipient entities. Innovation and 
partnerships are encouraged to scale up successful initiatives. This entails connecting media 
practitioners with non-traditional actors (such as data scientists, social entrepreneurs, civic tech 
activists, the creative class, industry associations, and digital security experts) to foster learning 
and ideas for wider impact and more sustainable change in the media sector. 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● EG.5.2-2: Number of private sector firms [non-state news outlets] that have improved 
management practices or technologies as a result of USG assistance (required) 
● Extent to which supported media outlets achieve key milestones determined in their 
business models (e.g., number of subscribers, total revenue, number of views) 
● Extent to which supported media diversify their revenue sources (% and/or number of 
revenue sources outside of donor funding) 
● Number of strategies developed for monetization of content 
● Number of outlets using data to inform (a) content development and (b) monetization 
strategies 
● Level of audience engagement with supported media 
● CBLD-9: Percent of USG-assisted organizations with improved performance (required) 


 

ER 2.2 A sustainable media support fund established 

A major focus of this activity is to indigenize support for public interest media in Armenia to 
decrease the reliance of independent media development on donor funding. To this end, the 
activity is expected to establish, or support a local organization to host, a sustainable media 
support fund (for example, incorporated as an endowment) that will eventually operate as a 
financially independent entity providing a range of investment instruments and complementary 
technical assistance. The fund is expected to support the growth of an independent media 
ecosystem producing balanced, high quality content, while building financially viable media 
businesses. It is anticipated that by the end of the activity, the fund will have matured to become a 
direct recipient of USAID and other sources of funding to pursue its vision of becoming a 
sustainable funding model to reduce the dependency of public interest media on international 
donor funding. 


The activity is expected to build on existing USAID-funded scoping in Armenia10, as well as 
global best practices, to identify a feasible strategy for the fund’s institutional set-up, legal and 
governance structures, business development plan, and short- and long-term investment 
instruments. The activity is then expected to support the operationalization of this strategy by 
supporting the establishment of the fund and building its technical, organizational, and 
fundraising capacities. As it builds the capacity of the fund, the activity is expected to provide 
subgrants to the fund to gradually transfer the administration of the grants and technical assistance 
described under Objective 1, ER 2.1, and the media defense fund under ER 3.1 to start building 
the fund’s reputation and credibility. In parallel, the activity is expected to continue the 
organizational capacity building and mentorship of the entity and explore public-private 
partnerships, new investment instruments, and fundraising opportunities for the fund’s long-term 
sustainability. 

10 https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ItjJ_AEutziK52KD_gCO9fBCk8JL21RH 

 

In Year 4, the recipient is expected to conduct an organizational capacity assessment of and make 
a recommendation to USAID on the entity’s maturity towards sustainability. Should the Media 
Support Fund administrator be deemed mature enough for independent operation to receive direct 
funding, the recipient is expected to continue providing mentoring and coaching support. 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● Milestone achievements for the establishment and operationalization of the Media Support 
Fund administrator 


 

Objective 3. Foster enabling environment for independent information flow 

This objective will foster an enabling environment for independent information flow by 
improving the legal-regulatory foundation for independent media, on the one hand, and 
strengthening media literacy and societal resilience to disinformation and demand for quality 
journalism, on the other. 

ER 3.1 Collective advocacy for improved media climate strengthened 

Coordinated and evidence-based advocacy: The rapidly evolving media environment 
necessitates a concerted, inclusive, and agile approach to respond to the sector’s development and 
its enabling legal and regulatory environment. Assistance under ER 3.1 is expected to facilitate 
more strategic and sector-wide coordinated advocacy on legislative and policy initiatives affecting 
the media and information space, including freedom of press, freedom of information, internet 
freedom, and digital safety. This entails improving the ability of media and civil society 
organizations (CSOs) to prioritize, monitor, and engage collectively with decision-makers on new 
or amended legislation, author policy and legislative initiatives, and prevent policies that erode 
press freedom. This also includes strengthening the ability of local organizations to create 
evidence-based analyses on the media and information ecosystem to inform and prioritize their 
advocacy efforts. Under this ER, the activity is expected to also explore the legal-regulatory 
framework for creating an endowment-based media support fund and incentives to support public 
interest media as described under ER 2.2. In addition to technical assistance, the activity is 


expected to incorporate a grants pool to support collective and, where relevant, grassroots 
advocacy and monitoring initiatives, as well as partnerships on media reforms across the public, 
civil society, and private sectors. 

Regulatory mechanisms: Efforts under ER 3.1 are expected to foster the independence and 
accountability of regulatory bodies and improve the effectiveness of self-regulatory mechanisms. 
This can entail technical assistance to the National Commission on Television and Radio and the 
Council of Public Broadcaster oversight bodies, as well as sub-grants to monitor and advocate for 
the independence of these oversight bodies. The activity is also expected to build on the 
achievements and enhance the capacity and reach of the Media Ethics Observatory self-regulatory 
mechanism, including support for creative public outreach efforts, handling complaints and 
appeals, and discussions on issues of common professional interest. 

Media defense fund: To complement the efforts directed at the broader media environment, the 
activity is expected to incorporate a response mechanism to address legal-regulatory issues faced 
by media practitioners. This can include but not be limited to legal aid for strategic litigation to 
contest select cases related to violations of press freedom, freedom of expression, freedom of 
information, as well as to respond to violations of labor rights of journalists. 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● DR.5.3-2: Number of USG-assisted media-sector CSOs and/or institutions serve to 
strengthen the independent media or journalists (required) 
● Level of capacity of media support organizations and related coalitions to advocate in a 
coordinated matter on behalf of the sector 
● Number of research products on the legal-regulatory environment of the media sector 
● Number of positive policy changes or modifications to enabling legislation/regulations for 
media prepared with USG assistance 
● Number of media houses joining self-regulatory mechanisms 
● Number of cases resolved in compliance with opinions of self-regulatory mechanisms 


 

ER 3.2 Resilience to disinformation and propaganda strengthened 

Improved media and information literacy: In an increasingly networked world where 
information consumption is an interactive process where anyone can produce, disseminate, and 
share news, it is critical for both society and government to develop resilience against 
disinformation, misinformation, and malinformation–whether internal or external–and to 
understand the fundamental role of a free press in advancing democratic goals. Technical 
assistants and grants under ER 3.2 are expected to improve the ability of individuals to understand 
and appreciate the role of independent and public interest media, as well as seek, analyze, use, 
create, and disseminate information, both online and offline, more effectively and responsibly. 
This entails efforts to identify audiences particularly vulnerable to disinformation and to improve 
their understanding of their rights online, tools to combat cyberbullying and hate speech online, 
ethical issues surrounding the access and use of information and how algorithms underlying social 
media targeting operate. The use of creative solutions and partnerships with the private sector and 
non-traditional players to expand and sustain the reach of initiatives to broader segments of the 
society is strongly encouraged. 


Institutionalizing media literacy education: The incorporation of media and digital literacy in 
state standards for secondary education presents a unique window of opportunity to streamline 
media literacy instruction in the formal education system. The activity is expected to work with 
government officials, educators, CSOs, and the private sector to support the institutionalization 
and sustainability of this process. Interventions are expected to build on existing formal and 
informal media literacy initiatives to expand efforts and ensure coordination across initiatives. 
This line of effort is expected to be closely coordinated with USAID’s Armenia Civics for 
Engagement activity. 

Media monitoring, fact-checking, and media analysis: Technical assistance and grants under 
ER 3.2 are expected to strengthen local capacity to map, measure, and monitor media for evidence 
of disinformation, media manipulation, propaganda, paid news, censorship, conflict of interest, 
and other violations of professional standards. Assistance will also be targeted at systemic 
analysis of prevalent disinformation narratives, as well as investigation and exposure of purveyors 
of disinformation. Assistance is expected to encourage the use of cutting-edge methodologies to 
analyze information ecosystems and vulnerabilities to disinformation across communities. 
Assistance will ensure that monitoring efforts, including research reports, media-on-media 
critiques, fact-checking initiatives, and investigations on disinformation meet strict professional 
and methodological standards that prioritize objectivity, accuracy, and reliability. Collaboration 
with existing media monitoring platforms, such as media.am, is strongly encouraged. 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● Number of positive efforts by the government related to media literacy 
● Number of subjects/areas of integration with media literacy principles 
● Percentage change of beneficiaries reporting a change in media consumption habits 
(media literacy skill surveys) 
● Level of understanding of core skills and competencies related to media literacy 
● Level of CSO support for independent media 
● Number of people reached through media literacy efforts with USG assistance 
● Number of media monitoring analytical products published 
● Audience reached by platforms providing critical analysis of media 


V. OPERATING PRINCIPLES AND GUIDING STRATEGIES 

Gender: Information dissemination across different media platforms is equally available to men 
and women in Armenia. Gender equality, however, is not well reflected in news reporting, and 
media content often lacks a gender sensitive angle. The USAID’s 2019 Armenia Gender Analysis 
found that the prevailing patriarchal and traditionally rigid social norms and perceptions regarding 
masculinity, femininity, and gender roles create unequal expectations for men and women with 
respect to income generation, educational and professional achievement, and political 
participation. The media often reinforces these stereotypes. According to VIBE, “society at large 
is resistant to receiving information, experiences, and viewpoints about genders other than those 
traditionally accepted in the country.”11 The report also highlights the skewed gender balance in 
the media sector. Although women outnumber men in the profession, men dominate in media 

11 https://www.irex.org/sites/default/files/pdf/vibe-armenia-2021.pdf, p. 5. 


Notice of Funding Opportunity Number (NOFO): 72011123RFA00001,
MediaIntegrity and Resilience in ArmeniaActivity

management. Viewpoints of marginalized groups are underrepresented in the mainstream media,
although they find “alternative methods and platforms for expressing their views.”12 Further, 
gender-specific digital security threats should be taken into consideration. According to a study 
conducted by UNESCO and theInternational Center for Journalists, 73% of women journalistswho responded had experienced online violence in the course of their work; 25% had received 
threats of physical violence, while 18% of them had been threatened with sexual violence; and 
20% of women reported being attacked offline in connection with online violence they had 
experienced. Such attacks create a chilling effect that silences female journalists online and create 
a deterrent to freedom ofexpression.13Genderequality and female empowerment are expected tobe integrated in theactivity design. In line with USAID’s Gender Equality and FemaleEmpowerment policy, the activity is expected to adopt a gender-sensitive approach to 
implementation and content production to ensure that men and women participate in and areportrayed in content production in an equitable manner, to advance women’s image in media and 
their role in leaders and experts and decision-makers, to advance women’srepresentation in 
management roles in themedia industry, and to include gender-sensitive solutions to improve thedigital, physical and psycho-social safety and security of men and women journalists. 
Interventions are expected to ensure that training and mentoring opportunities areaccessible, 
secure,and safe for participants regardless of gender, (dis)ability and/or age. 

Inclusion: The activity is also expected tofollow USAID’s inclusive development policies toengage, wherefeasible, and reflect the inclusion needs of marginalized groups, including peoplewith disabilities, LGBTIQ+, ethnic and religious minorities in media content production. It isanticipated that the inclusion of marginalized groups and issues related to marginalized groupsareintegrated in designed approaches. A special attention should be paid to countering malign 
narratives, which often use deeply-rooted societalstereotypes related to marginalized groups aswedge issues in disinformation campaigns. 

USAID pays special attention to youth as drivers of change, future leaders within the society, and 
entrepreneurs within theworkforce. In recent years, young activists in Armenia have been at theforefront of civic activism, often using social media to advocatefor and advancecivic initiatives. 
It is important to harness and cultivate this growing potential with special consideration of thepatterns of engagementwith media among the youth, as well as their vulnerability to 
misinformation and disinformation. In doing so, the activity is expected to pursue a PositiveYouth Development approach in line with USAID’s Youth in Development Policy, which 
engages youth, their families, communities, and governments to empoweryouth to reach theirfullpotential. Interventions are expected to develop skills and competencies, foster healthy 
relationships, and strengthen the environment to ensure that youth are meaningfully engaged in 
the programming and effectively contribute to their communities. They should encourage youth 
leadership, experiential learning, and adult approachability, with an intentional focus on 
developing competencesand behaviors that support pro-social attitudes, aclear and positivepersonal identity, and positive belief in the future.

12Ibid13“Safety of Women Journalists”, UNESCO. Accessed on 6/16/2022:https://en.unesco.org/themes/safety-
journalists/women-journalists/global-survey-results

16 


Private Sector Engagement and Partnerships: USAID’s Private Sector Engagement (PSE) 
Policy calls for USAID to increase, deepen, and diversify its partnerships with the private sector 
to improve development outcomes. The policy notes the important role of implementing partners, 
who can “build relationships with private sector partners; emphasize different forms of PSE, 
including non-financial collaboration; expand and pilot PSE approaches for greater impact; and 
share PSE experiences to enhance learning across the development and private sectors.” PSE will 
be a key factor for the success and sustainability of this activity. To this end, there will be a 
deliberate effort to establish strategic partnerships with a diverse group of stakeholders that will 
help leverage private sector investment, bring new expertise, new technologies, and innovation. 
This activity is expected to engage with the domestic technology, business, and creative sectors to 
enhance the sophistication, reach, and innovation of interventions. A particular emphasis will be 
made to leveraging private sector expertise and investments for market-based solutions to 
diversity revenue sources for target media actors and advance the sector’s long-term financial 
viability, as well as public-private partnerships to support public interest media. The activity will 
also seek to engage with private sector stakeholders connected to platforms that Armenians use to 
communicate and share information, including disinformation, to address technical approaches to 
amplify high quality and trusted news, while fostering increased media literacy and mitigating the 
spread of harmful content across the information space. 

Digital Development and Innovation: USAID’s Digital Strategy charts the Agency’s vision for 
development through a rapidly evolving digital landscape with an emphasis on efficient, effective, 
and responsible digital initiatives that are consistent with respect for individual rights, open and 
competitive markets, freedom of expression, and the promotion of democratic norms and 
practices. This activity is expected to capitalize on digital tools and the use of data-driven 
approaches to strengthen the media sector’s approach to content creation and its ability to 
understand audience needs and engage with them for deepening trust and widening impact across 
a variety of platforms and technologies. It is also expected to ensure that media and information 
literacy includes not only developing critical thinking skills to access and interact with news and 
information, but to use information and communication technologies safely and securely. This 
includes ensuring that citizens, civil society, and government understand the role of the media in 
promoting transparency and accountability across open, inclusive, and secure digital ecosystems. 
To this end, there will be a deliberate emphasis on the use of experimentation and best practices 
to scale up promising initiatives and ideas. 

Sustainability of Efforts: Sustainability of interventions, i.e., the ability of the created human and 
institutional capacity and skills, formed partnerships, and developed tools and mechanisms to 
continue to develop beyond the activity, is a key consideration. The activity is expected to ensure 
that systems, knowledge, and skills introduced during the implementation of the award are 
properly and in a timely manner transferred to relevant stakeholders and actors. This entails 
ensuring, on a best effort basis, that there is demonstrated commitment and potential capacity 
among all actors to adapt and claim ownership of introduced systems, processes, and capacities. 
In particular, the activity is expected to ensure that: the capacity building activities create the 
knowledge and skill base enabling the unobstructed operation of independent media actors; the 
new business models are developed with long-term feasibility considerations; the public media 
support mechanism is developed with long-term sustainability as a key factor; the capacity and 


network of local media support organizations is strengthened to ensure concerted and ongoing 
advocacy for improved media environment; and the media literacy efforts are institutionalized. 

Coordination with Key Stakeholders and Other Assistance Activities: The activity will initiate 
and facilitate regular coordination meetings and information exchange with other donor-funded 
media assistance activities to avoid duplication and ensure complementarity of effort. The activity 
is also expected to coordinate and explore synergies with relevant stakeholders in the government, 
civil society, academia, and private sector, as well as other relevant development actors to 
leverage partnerships, resources, and information to contribute to the enabling environment for 
the achievement of the objective and expected results of the activity. 

Countering Trafficking in Persons: USAID intentionally incorporates human trafficking 
prevention and protection measures in activities across sectors to counter trafficking in persons 
(C-TIP). The activity is expected to raise awareness among media professionals on C-TIP and, 
where relevant, ensure that C-TIP issues are duly addressed in media production and contribute to 
increased public awareness on C-TIP. 

VII. MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING 

Following USAID’s Evaluation Policy, Program Cycle Guidance, and relevant guidance on 
collaborating, learning and adopting (CLA), the activity will develop a Monitoring, Evaluation, 
and Learning (MEL) Plan to rigorously document the activity’s relevance and to learn from 
interventions, accomplished results, as well as challenges and failures. The MEL consists of at 
least three distinct, yet interrelated sections: (1) Monitoring, (2) Evaluation, and (3) CLA. 

Monitoring: This entails, but is not limited to, developing a sound logical framework, identifying 
indicators and realistic targets that correspond to and measure the interventions and different 
levels of results (activity objectives, expected results, outcomes, and outputs), identifying means 
of verification and frequency of data collection, as well as the tools/methods for collecting, 
monitoring, analyzing, reporting, and maintaining the data. The MEL Plan is expected to include 
a mix of custom and standard indicators from the Standard Foreign Assistance Master Indicator 
List. All people-level indicators must be disaggregated by sex and gender. The implementing 
partner is expected to establish baseline measurements and targets to assess the performance of 
the interventions. The regular audience research and other surveys conducted as part of the 
activity will be customized to inform the activity’s MEL. 

Evaluation: The activity is expected to undergo external mid-term and endline performance 
evaluations commissioned by the implementing partner. The scope and timeframes of the external 
evaluations will be agreed upon with USAID. 

CLA: Employing an adaptive management and flexible approach is critical to the success of the 
activity, given the vulnerabilities related to the geopolitical instability, volatile political will to 
keep the media space open, as well as the fast pace of technological developments and their 
potential impact on programmatic interventions. This approach entails incorporating in program 
design and implementation plans pause-and-reflect exercises and feedback mechanisms to inform 
agile and data-driven assistance that meets stakeholder and beneficiary needs, mitigates potential 
risks, and lays the ground for long-term sustainability. The activity will establish a formal 


framework in which the implementing partner(s) and USAID personnel will monitor and/or have 
feedback mechanisms to inform decisions. Feedback mechanisms are expected to inform activity 
strategies and interventions with a greater understanding of the vulnerabilities of the media and 
information space. The activity is also expected to convene regular facilitated media ecosystem 
roundtables with thought leaders on media issues to assess the relevance of the interventions. The 
collected data is expected to ensure that relevant stakeholders–including, as relevant, USAID, the 
implementing partner, other development actors, and government counterparts–have the data 
points and mechanisms integrated in the activity’s Work Plan to inform programmatic pivots and 
policy decisions. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the necessity for contingency 
planning and adapting to new modalities of operations in emergency situations. The activity is 
therefore expected to incorporate contingency plans to ensure responsive programming and 
uninterrupted operations. 

VIII. STAFFING AND MANAGEMENT 

The Recipient must have the necessary mix of staff and requisite levels of professional expertise 
to implement the activity and should identify, recruit, hire and support appropriate personnel. The 
Recipient must supply Key Personnel - as determined by the Recipient - essential to the work to 
be performed under the award. Key Personnel are expected to be in-country (if applicable) and 
fully engaged by no later than 60 days after the award’s effective date. When qualified personnel 
are available, the Recipient should utilize local personnel with appropriate experience and 
expertise. 

The Recipient is expected to commit to gender equality and social inclusion and should consider 
equitable balance of staffing and staff requirements; personnel systems, hiring and management; 
and capacity development principles and approaches. 

Professional-level skills and management practices are required in the performance of the activity. 
Accordingly, the Recipient will be expected to establish an effective quality control program to 
assure that deliverables and other products meet professional standards and comply with terms 
and conditions of the Agreement. 

The Recipient should have an organizational structure that adequately meets management needs 
to implement all initiatives. 

END OF SECTION A 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to 
provide up to $15,000,000 in total USAID funding over a five-year period. 

 

2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 


The Recipient must develop qualitative and quantitative indicators, including appropriate 
Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators (F indicators) as mandated by USAID, to measure the 
activity achievement at the purpose, IR, sub-IR and output levels, and establish baselines for those 
indicators. All indicators must be consistent with 1) USAID’s Strategic Framework and 
USAID/Armenia’s Performance Management Plan (PMP). Indicators must measure potential 
achievement of the following expected results: 

● Adherence to professional and ethical standards of journalism improved 
● Fact-based coverage of priority topics increased 
● Competitiveness of supported media improved 
● A sustainable media support fund established 
● Collective advocacy for improved media climate strengthened 
● Resilience to disinformation and propaganda strengthened 


Relevant mandatory standard indicators will include: 

Objective 1 

● DR.5.3-1: Number of non-state news outlets assisted by USG (required) 


Objective 2 

● EG.5.2-2: Number of private sector firms [non-state news outlets] that have improved 
management practices or technologies as a result of USG assistance 
● CBLD-9: Percent of USG-assisted organizations with improved performance 


Objective 3 

● DR.5.3-2: Number of USG-assisted media-sector CSOs and/or institutions serve to 
strengthen the independent media or journalists 


Potential illustrative custom indicators include: 

Objective 1 

● Number of media that have clear codes of ethics and professional editorial guidelines 
● The extent to which supported media are equipped to produce professional and locally 
relevant content and leverage creative reporting formats 
● Level of adherence to ethical and professional standards among activity beneficiaries 



● Level of change in the overall amount of coverage of (or number of news products on) 
target topics of interest and marginalized groups in media supported (disaggregated by 
topic) 
● Quality of content produced by activity beneficiaries 


Objective 2 

● Extent to which supported media outlets achieve key milestones determined in their 
business models (e.g., number of subscribers, total revenue, number of views) 
● Extent to which supported media diversify their revenue sources (% and/or number of 
revenue sources outside of donor funding) 
● Number of strategies developed for monetization of content 
● Number of outlets using data to inform (a) content development and (b) monetization 
strategies 
● Level of audience engagement with supported media 
● Milestone achievements for the establishment and operationalization of the fund 


Objective 3 

● Level of capacity of media support organizations and related coalitions to advocate in a 
coordinated mater on behalf of the sector 
● Number of research products on the legal-regulatory environment of the media sector 
● Number of positive policy changes or modifications to enabling legislation/regulations for 
media prepared with USG assistance 
● Number of media houses joining self-regulatory mechanisms 
● Number of cases resolved in compliance with opinions of self-regulatory mechanisms 
● Number of positive efforts by the government related to media literacy 
● Number of subjects/areas of integration with media literacy principles 
● Percentage change of beneficiaries reporting a change in media consumption habits 
(media literacy skill surveys) 
● Level of understanding of core skills and competencies related to media literacy 
● Level of CSO support for independent media 
● Number of individuals reached through media literacy efforts with USG assistance 
● Number of media monitoring analytical products published 
● Audience reached by platforms providing critical analysis of media 


 

The list of indicators will be finalized as part of the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning Plan (AMEL Plan). 

The Recipient is responsible for ensuring data collection, storage analysis, reporting as well as 
ensuring the quality of indicator data, including those provided by any sub-awardees. The 
Recipient must ensure the validity, integrity, precision, reliability, and timeliness of data used for 
measuring performance of the Activity and informing decision making. All externally reported 
indicators must have a data quality assessment (DQA). 

In order to better represent the results of USAID-funded activities, when applicable USAID 
requires geographically disaggregated indicators to measure the Activity’s results. Such indicators 
include information on the location or geographic scale of the Activity's performance, impact, or 


other information. Geographically disaggregated indicators enable the Activity to investigate the 
geographic variation in performance for improved monitoring, learning, and adapting. 

The time it takes to ascertain potential baselines will depend on the nature of the indicators and 
their data sources. The target will be determined once the baseline is established. It is generally 
expected that all such baseline and target information must be included in the AMEL Plan. 

3. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five years. The estimated start date will be on/a March, 
2023 through on/a March 2028. 

 

4. Substantial Involvement 


 

A. Approval of the Recipient’s Annual Implementation Plan. The annual implementation 
plans and subsequent revisions are subject to approval by USAID’s Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) prior to implementing substantive work for each year of the 
Agreement. 


 

B. Approval of Specified Key Personnel and Any Changes. The positions indicated below 
have been designated as key to the successful implementation of the program objectives of 
this Agreement. Prior to replacing the key personnel, the Recipient must immediately 
notify both the Agreement Officer and AOR reasonably in advance and must submit 
written justification, including proposed substitutions, in sufficient detail to permit 
evaluation of the impact on the program. No replacement of these specified key personnel 
shall be made by the Recipient without consent of the Agreement Officer. When 
submitting requests for approval of Key Personnel, the Applicant should submit for each 
Key Personnel a Statement of Qualifications (SOQ) that clearly explains why the 
individual is suited for the proposed position and possesses the skills, knowledge and thus 
meets the proposed minimum qualifications, and contributes to the collective knowledge 
and experience requirements and identify a minimum of three (3) references of 
professional contacts, with contact information, preferably including email addresses. 
Note that it is in the interest of the Applicant to inform these contacts that 
USAID/Armenia will be contacting them in order to obtain information to verify 
qualifications. 


 

1. TBD - Name, Key Personnel Position (equivalent of Financial Director), 
Roles/Responsibilities, Minimum Qualifications 
2. TBD - Name, Key Personnel Position, Roles/Responsibilities, Minimum Qualifications 
3. TBD - Name, Key Personnel Position, Roles/Responsibilities, Minimum Qualifications 
4. TBD - Name, Key Personnel Position, Roles/Responsibilities, Minimum Qualifications 


 

C. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation. When the Recipient’s 
successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical 
knowledge, USAID may specify the collaboration or joint participation of USAID and the 
Recipient on the program. There should be sufficient reason for Agency involvement and 
the involvement should be specifically tailored to support identified elements. When these 



conditions are met, USAID may specify appropriate levels of substantial involvement 
such as the following: 


 

1. Concurrence on Sub-Awards – The sub-award, transfer, or contracting out of any work 
under an award already requires the Recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval under 
2 CFR 200.308. However, under this award, the Agreement Officer has delegated sub-
award approvals to the AOR up to $150,000. Any subaward approval above $150,000 
must be provided by the AO, with the concurrence from the AOR. 
2. Approval of Activity Monitoring Evaluation and Learning (AMEL) Plan – USAID 
will review and approve the Recipient’s activity monitoring evaluation and learning 
plan, inclusive of realistic and appropriate performance indicators and plans for 
periodic evaluation of activities, and all subsequent changes to the AMEL plan. 
3. Approval of activity site locations and geographic targeting. 
4. Direction or Redirection Because of Interrelationships with other projects. USAID 
may provide directions to the Recipient to help achieve results through coordination 
with other activities sponsored by the U.S. government or other donors, to avoid 
duplication of effort, and/or support U.S. foreign policy considerations 
5. Participation in Preparation of Technical Publications. USAID may: 
(i) Participate in technical discussions with the Recipient in the development of 
content for print and electronic publications and/or 
(ii) Review and approve final versions of all print or electronic publications before 
publication to ensure compliance with the approved Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan. 


 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937 
(the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source), and 110 (the United 
States, the independent states of the former Soviet Union or developing countries, excluding 
prohibited source countries.) 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Media Integrity and 
Resilience in Armenia Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient 
will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. 
The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent 
with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 

 

 


 

7. Selection of Instrument 


 

The planned activity, calls for a multi-faceted approach to strengthen the integrity of the 
information space in Armenia, including through the enhancement of journalistic standards and 
quality of content produced, strengthening the competitiveness of media actors, improving the 
legal-regulatory environment for media independence, and institutionalizing media literacy 
promotion. 

 

USAID/Armenia’s programmatic needs would best be met by a transfer of funds to the recipient – 

identified through a full and open competition – to support its purpose of strengthening the 
integrity of the information space. The direct beneficiaries of the subject activity will be the media 
actors, civil society organizations, citizens, and the government of Armenia. The activity will 
complement USAID/Armenia’s mission by supporting the implementation of this activity by a 
recipient that brings context-appropriate expertise in current issues of media development and 
builds local ownership, institutions, and expertise. To preserve the intrinsic independence and 
neutrality of the activity, especially content to be produced and legislative initiatives to be 
developed, it is not in the United States’ interest to produce content or determine the specific 
approaches of regulation of the information space. Thus, the Activity’s objectives would be best 
met by having an independent entity implement them and not as an agent of the U.S. government. 

At the same time, the recipient’s successful implementation of the program activities would 
benefit and depend on USAID’s technical knowledge. 

 

 

END OF SECTION B 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

Pursuant to Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 
award profit under assistance instruments such as cooperative agreements. While for-profit firms 
may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 700.13(A)(1) Prohibition against profit, no funds will be paid 
as profit to any for-profit entity receiving or administering Federal financial assistance as a 
recipient or subrecipient, and as such, for-profit organizations must waive profits and/or fees to be 
eligible to submit an application. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial 
assistance on the same basis as any other organization and are subject to the protections and 
requirements of Federal law. 

 

Successful applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation 
processes, internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. Thus, in order for an award to be made, the AO 
must make a positive “risk assessment,” as discussed in ADS 303.3.9. This means that the 
applicant must possess, or have the ability to obtain, the necessary management and technical 
competence to conduct the proposed activity. The applicant must agree to practice mutually 
agreed-upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided or funded by USAID. 

 

In the absence of a positive risk assessment, an award can ordinarily not be made. However, in 
rare cases, an award can be made with “Specific Conditions” (e.g., additional non-standard award 
requirements designed to minimize the risk presented to USAID of making an award to an NGO 
for which a positive risk assessment cannot be made), but only where it appears likely that the 
applicant can correct the deficiency in a reasonable period. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

USAID has established a mandatory recipient cost share of five percent (5%) for the award. Such 
funds may be provided directly by the recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation 
donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private businesses that 
contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities at the country level. This may 
include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or other facilities or equipment which 
may be used for the program, provided by the recipient. For guidance on cost sharing in grants 
and cooperative agreements see 2 CFR 200.306. 

 

3. Other 

 

An applicant may submit only one application under this Notice of Funding Opportunity. 

 


When considering making an award to a potential partner, USAID will undertake necessary pre‐award 
reviews to determine the organization’s “responsibility” as discussed below. The resultant award to 
this organization may take some time. The applicant should take this into account and plan their 
implementation dates and activities accordingly. USAID reserves the right to perform pre-award 
reviews for the local partner, regardless of prior experience with USAID. 

 

USAID discourages any applicant from requiring exclusive commitments by local organizations to 
participate as part of the consortium or sub-award. Local organizations participating in a consortium 
may elect to participate in another consortium under a different application. 

 

 

END OF SECTION C 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Name: Abdullah Akbar 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email: abakbar@usaid.gov 

 Mail Address: USAID/Armenia 

U.S. Embassy 

1 American Avenue 

Yerevan 0082, Armenia 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted via the following email addresses: 
nsarkisian@usaid.gov and yerevanaidaao@usaid.gov no later than the date and time indicated on 
the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this 
NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants as an amendment to this 
NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be 
prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

The Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. The Application must be 
submitted in two separate parts: The Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please see 
Subsections 4 through 7 below for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only, 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Any applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied 
by evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

The Application must comply with the following: 

● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8.27” x 11.69”, single sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman 
font, 1” margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including 
consecutive page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● A 10-point font may be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with 
the 12-point Times New Roman requirement. 



● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked 
and no hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be 
submitted in addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the 
official cost application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent sections. 
Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 

 

The Applicant must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do 
so may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. The Applicant 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. The Applicant must retain proof of timely delivery in 
the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date and time/e-mail confirmation 
from the receiving office. 

 

The Application must be submitted by email via the following email address: 
yerevanaidaao@usaid.gov. Email submissions must include the NOFO number and applicant’s 
name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the 
subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and 
the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g., "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if 
your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that 
states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, i.e., you consolidate the various parts of a technical application 
into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how 
to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic 
applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, the applicant should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same 
email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" 
email. 

 


The Applicant is reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, the applicant is requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the 
government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, the 
applicant is discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Armenia cannot guarantee 
their acceptance by the internet server. The total size of attached files to a single email must not 
exceed 25Mb. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this activity. The application should take into account the requirements of the activity and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The page length of the entire Technical Application must not exceed 20 pages exclusive of 
Annexes and other pages not subject to the page limitation, as indicated below. Any pages beyond 
these 20 pages will NOT be evaluated. The cover page, dividers, table of contents, acronyms list, 
and annexes are not included in the page limit of 20 pages. 

 

The table below outlines the application sections and page limits including annexes. Pages 
exceeding these page limits will not be evaluated. 

 

 

No 

Technical Application Section 

Page Limit 

a. 

Cover Page 

1 page 

b. 

Executive Summary 

1 page 

c. 

Technical Approach 

10 pages 

d. 

Management Approach and Staffing Plan 

5 pages 

e. 

Adaptive Management 

3 pages 

f. 

Required Annexes (do not count toward the page limit) 

 

 

A. Illustrative Logical Framework 

1 page 

 

B. Illustrative Timeline 

2 pages 

 

C. Organizational Structure Diagram 

2 pages 

 

D. Staffing Plan 

8 pages 




 

a. Cover Page (1 page, does not count against the page limit) 


 

The Cover Page should include at a minimum the following information: 

 

● USAID NOFO Number 
● Activity Title 
● Name of the organization submitting the application 
● Point of contact with the authority to negotiate and sign on behalf of the applicant, 
including the name (both typed and signature), title or position with the 
organization/institution, address, telephone numbers, and email address 
● If applicable, name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships, listed separately 
(identify if any of the organizations are local organizations or locally established 
organizations (LEPs), per USAID’s definition of “local entity” and LEP” under ADS 303) 


 

b. Executive Summary (1 page) 


 

The Executive Summary must concisely describe the key elements of the applicant’s technical 
application and be a succinct presentation of the information that the applicant believes best 
represents how the technical approach will lead to the objectives and expected results of the 
activity. 


c. Technical Approach (not to exceed 10 pages, excluding annexes) 


 

The Applicant must submit a Program Description that will be inserted in the cooperative 
agreement. In this Program Description, the applicant must detail a feasible and logically 
sequenced course of action to achieve the activity objectives and expected results described in 
Section A, including the applicant’s approach to operate a sub-grants program and the approach 
for establishing and building the sustainability of a media support fund, in the context of the 
opportunities and challenges in Armenia’s media sector and the operating principles outlined in 
Section A. 

 

To demonstrate this, the applicant must also include the following as annexes (which do not count 
toward the page limit and will not be incorporated into the agreement): 

● Annex A: An illustrative Logical Framework (1 page) capturing the links between the 
objectives, expected long-term and short-term results and corresponding indicators, and 
assumptions; 
● Annex B: An illustrative timeline in the form of a Gantt chart (not to exceed two pages) 
for the course of the activity, with monthly increments for the initial six months of the 
activity, and quarterly increments for the rest of the implementation period. 
d. Management Approach and Staffing Plan (not to exceed 5 pages, excluding annexes) 


 

In this section, the applicant must provide a well-articulated management and staffing plan that 
will lead to successful implementation of the objectives and expected results set forth in its 
proposed Program Description. 


 

This section should summarize how the applicant’s proposed management plan, teaming and 
partnership arrangements and organizational structure will enable effective implementation of the 
activity objectives and expected results. The narrative must include the roles and responsibilities 
of the prime organization, any sub-partners, consortium members (if applicable), as well as how 
the applicant intends to identify additional potential subrecipients and manage subawards. This 
section should describe the roles and responsibilities of the Home Office staff, in case of 
international applicants, including their assigned management and decision-making authorities. 

 

The applicant must also describe how its staffing plan will efficiently and effectively provide the 
greatest likelihood of achieving expected results. The staffing plan must adequately describe the 
proposed overall skills mix, anticipated distribution of these skills and personnel and use of 
support staff and/or short-term technical assistance (if applicable), demonstrating how this 
mixture will collectively possess the required technical and management expertise and skills to 
achieve the expected results, and how the proposed staffing will meet the Section A 
considerations. 

 

The Applicant must also describe how it will undertake subrecipient oversight and management 
and build sub-recipient, local entity capacity to enable progressive leadership of local entities and 
potentially qualify local entities to manage the Media Support Fund. For key personnel, the 
applicant is encouraged to propose a transition plan to local personnel if expatriates are proposed. 
The applicant must also address its mitigation strategy for retention of qualified staff and how it 
will promptly and satisfactorily change personnel if and when problems arise. 

 

This section must also propose which positions will be Key Personnel and how these individuals 
will contribute to the overall successful implementation of the activity. The staffing plan should 
describe their roles and responsibilities and proposed minimum qualifications for each position; in 
a format to be included in the Cooperative Agreement. The Applicant must not propose or name 
candidates at this time. Immediately after award, the Recipient is required to submit proposed 
candidates and their Statement of Qualifications per Section B.4.b. 

 

Note: USAID strongly discourages the use of exclusive agreements with organizations as this 
limits USAID’s ability to receive the best services. 

 

In support of the above narrative, the Applicant must include the following as Annexes (which do 
not count toward the page limit): 

 

● Annex C - Organizational Structure Diagram: A diagram that illustrates the proposed 
organizational structure, including teaming and partnership arrangements, and roles of 
partner organizations if any, to achieve the objectives of the activity. There is no set form 
for this Annex. It may not exceed two pages. 


 

● Annex D - Staffing Plan: A diagram/matrix that provides proposed staffing, including all 
key and non-key personnel positions, and roles and responsibilities. There is no set form 
for this Annex, but it should not exceed 8 pages. The summary of each position should be 
succinct to be able to understand the staffing pattern and plan. For the Key Personnel 



positions, the matrix should describe the position, roles and responsibilities and proposed 
minimum qualifications that align with the expertise and experience needed to undertake 
the roles and responsibilities. 


 

e. Adaptive Management (not to exceed 3 pages) 


 

The section must describe how the applicant’s MEL and CLA methodologies will effectively 
apply adaptive management techniques to inform activity management and key decisions. 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.5a above for requirements) 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 














 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 















 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application upon request by the AO: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must 
contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant must 
ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as 
Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to 
support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Annex 1 for Summary 
Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project., 
similar to the template in Annex 1. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 



reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 
of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used 
and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental 
costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if 
any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, 
condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as 
the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – Not Applicable 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the 


applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved 
NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other 
than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the 
Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and 
finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further 
guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this 
methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as 
a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may 
apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly 
vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one 
program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 


under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

(9) Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be 
provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the 
basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the 
cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing 
the resulting award. USAID has established a mandatory minimum recipient’s cost share of 5% 
(five percent) of projected award amount for the award. Please refer to Section C. 2 Cost Sharing 
or Matching. 

 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● Unique Entity Identifier (UIE) Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the 
Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) Unique Entity Identifier and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (UEI) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal 
awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid UEI for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 



2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not 
qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another 
applicant. 

 

SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

To register your entity, you can get a Unique Entity Identifier (SAM) as part of your registration. 
You should also go to SAM.gov and select Get Started. 

 

Note: The UEI (SAM) is assigned automatically to all active and inactive SAM.gov registered 
entities. This information is displayed on SAM.gov. 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

h) History of Performance (3 pages) 

History of Performance information will not be rated. It will be used for risk assessment by 
USAID. 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed 3 to 5 awards over the past five years, as follows: 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award Number; 
● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last five years (to be provided upon 
USAID request; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the 
work at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current 
contact information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed 
individual. 



If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. 

USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an applicant’s history of 
performance from any sources and may consider such information in its review of the applicant’s 
risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award survey if it 
determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

(i) Responsibility Determination 

 

To assist the Agreement Officer to make a determination of the Applicant’s risk, the Applicant is 
requested to demonstrate: 

 

1) Applicant has adequate financial resources or the ability to obtain such resources, as 


required during the performance of the award; 

2) Applicant has the ability to meet the award terms and conditions, considering all existing 


prospective recipient commitments, both non-governmental and governmental; 

3) Applicant has a satisfactory record of business integrity; 

4) Applicant is otherwise qualified to receive an award under applicable laws and 

regulations. 

 

j) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

USAID seeks to achieve a high level of public visibility through an array of communication 
activities, including media coverage, social media engagement, and events. USAID policy on the 
branding and marking of the work products of this agreement is contained in 2 CFR 700.16; 
USAID ADS Chapters 320, 557, and 558; and the USAID Graphic Standard Manual and Partner 
Co-Branding Guide. 

The applicant must submit a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan prior to award. Although the 
proposed Branding Strategy and Marking Plan will not be evaluated competitively, the 
Agreement Officer will review it for adequacy and compliance with USAID/Armenia’s Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan Guidance and Agency policies. The negotiated and approved Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan will be incorporated into the Cooperative Agreement at time of 
award. 

USAID encourages the use of social media and online platforms to publicize work, and to 
engage with development partners and learn from stakeholder communities in coordination with 
the existing media outreach and efforts of the USAID/Armenia mission. If the applicant intends 
to utilize social media, the Applicant must prepare a complementary social media strategy that 
is incorporated in the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan. 

For more information on Branding Strategy and Marking Plan guidance visit: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/320.pdf. 

 


The following provides additional minimum requirements for the Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan: 

 

1. BRANDING STRATEGY – ASSISTANCE (June 2012) 


 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
"Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and 
positioned, and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host 
country citizens. 




 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an 
award. 




 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame 
specified by the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 




 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and 
marking USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, 
materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are 
subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be 
incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement 
or other assistance instrument. 




 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 




 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID logo 
and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the USAID 
Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or APS states 
that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, 
seal, or tagline. 

 

(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or with) the 
generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when 
acknowledging contributions. 

 

(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 

 

(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the program or 
project. 


 

(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that competes 
with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to consistently 
identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI 
of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service announcements, 
billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 
country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so forth. 
Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the 
American People.” 

 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support this 
project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from the host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if 
they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

 

2. MARKING PLAN - ASSISTANCE (June 2012) 


a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that 
will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with 
the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the 


Agency and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the 
RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, 
seal, or tagline. 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to 
the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 

 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, public 
service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, media, or 
communications products funded by USAID; 

 

(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs. 

 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 

 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, 
fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity 
cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the 
support of the American people. 

 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 

 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 

 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and 
where the applicant will place the marking; 


 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID Identity, 
and 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of 
why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 

 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 
goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 


 

(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must explain why 
each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

 

(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 
particular item or product is better positioned as a host-country government item or 
product. 

 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item or 
commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would 
not be cost beneficial or practical. 

 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must 
identify the relevant norm and explain why marking would violate that norm or 
otherwise be inappropriate. 

 

(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international 
law violated by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the 
above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, 
the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 


g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

h) Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that will 
be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

i) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. 
The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal 
considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and 
duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. Should 
the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the 
application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) 
calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware 
of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this 
financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding 
opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the applicant. 

 


END OF SECTION D 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. General Information 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
The Applicant should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant subjects which 
the Applicant should address in the applications and (b) set the standard against which the 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

The Technical Application will be evaluated by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria 
described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

a. Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review of the applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. The Technical Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the 
following merit review criteria shown below in descending order of importance. 

 

1. Technical Approach 

 

The extent to which the applicant’s Program Description sets forth a feasible and logically 
sequenced course of action to achieve the activity objectives and expected results 
described in Section A, including the applicant’s approach to operate a sub-grants program 
and the approach for establishing and building the sustainability of a media support fund, 
in the context of the opportunities and challenges in Armenia’s media sector and the 
operating principles outlined in Section A. 

 

2. Management Approach and Staffing Plan 


The extent to which the applicant demonstrates a well-articulated management and 
staffing plan that will lead to the successful and efficient implementation of the objectives 
and expected results set forth in the Program Description. 

 

3. Adaptive Management 

 

Extent to which the applicant demonstrates how its MEL and CLA methodologies will 
effectively apply adaptive management techniques to inform activity management and key 
decisions. 

 

b. Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 


The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a preaward 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient 
has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial 
resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of 
the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of 
the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award 
with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

 

END OF SECTION E 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

A notice of award signed by the AO is the authorizing document. USAID will provide it to the 

selected Recipient electronically. Unsuccessful Applicants will be notified. 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

The USAID Caucasus Regional Contracting Office (RCO) will administer this award. The AO 
will designate an AOR to review, concur and/or approve on the items outlined in Substantial 
Involvement (Section B of this NOFO). 

 

See Annex 2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

A. Annual Implementation Work Plans 


 

The Recipient must work with USAID to develop and submit an annual implementation work 
Plan within 45 calendar days of the effective date of the award. The Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) will review and approve the plan within 15 calendar days after receipt of 
the draft implementation plan. Sixty (60) calendar days before the end of each USAID fiscal year, 
the Recipient must submit to the AOR an annual implementation work plan for the following 
fiscal year. 

 

The implementation plans will include activities for the given year, time frame and detailed 
budget for implementation of annual activities, and proposed outreach and communication 


activities. The plan will review the previous year’s accomplishments, challenges, and progress 
towards achieving results. 

 

The annual implementation plan will describe activities to be conducted at a greater level of detail 
than the Program Description of the award, but should be cross-referenced with the applicable 
sections in the Program Description. All activities must be within the objectives and expected 
results of the award. Annual implementation plans must not change such scope and objectives or 
any other terms and conditions of the award in any way; such changes may only be approved by 
the Agreement Officer, in advance and in writing. Thereafter, if there are inconsistencies between 
the implementation plan and Program Description or other terms and conditions of the award, the 
latter will take precedence over the former. 

 

The Annual Implementation Work Plans must include, at a minimum: 

● A strategic statement, articulating major impacts over the life of the activity, including 
information on how proposed interventions will be implemented. 
● A strategic statement of challenges to be addressed and opportunities to leverage. 
● All proposed interventions, including expected accomplishments and progress towards 
achieving results and performance measures tied to the indicators agreed upon within the 
Annual Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (AMEL) Plan. 
● Personnel requirements and consultancy needs during program implementation, including 
draft position descriptions to achieve expected outcomes. 
● Details of collaboration with other major partners. 
● Major commodities to be procured (as applicable). 


 

As part of the Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) process, the Recipient must review 
the Year One Annual Implementation Work Plan six months after the award date. The Recipient 
must inform the AOR if any revisions are required or appropriate to achieve the work plan by the 
end of Year One. If the Recipient does not anticipate completing its anticipated activities, the 
Recipient must submit a revised Annual Implementation Work Plan to the AOR for consideration 
by no later than the first day of the seventh month after award. The revised Annual 
Implementation Work Plan must explain the reasons why the Recipient does not anticipate 
completing its implementation strategy and provide a mitigation strategy. 

 

All Annual Implementation Work Plans, including significant revisions thereto, must be approved 
by the AOR. If at any time, it becomes necessary to revise the approved Annual Implementation 
Work Plan, the Recipient must submit proposed changes to the AOR for approval. 


B. Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (AMEL) Plan & DIS Reporting 


 

The Recipient must develop and implement an AMEL Plan in accordance with ADS 201.3.4.10. 
that measures and tracks progress toward the objectives and expected results. The Recipient must 
submit the AMEL Plan within 90 days after the effective date of award. The AOR will review and 
approve the plan within 20 calendar days after receipt of the draft AMEL Plan. If revisions are 
required, the Recipient must resubmit a further revised plan within 15 calendar days after receipt 
of comments provided by the AOR. 

 


The AMEL Plan should include: 


1. Overall description of the monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) approach, including 
proposed indicators, methodologies for collection and verification, data sources, and 
responsible parties; 
2. Planned internal evaluations; collaboration with any external evaluations, including Data 
Quality Assessments (DQA) conducted by USAID; 
3. Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) for each mandatory and custom indicator, 
including the rationale for selected custom indicators at the outcome level; 
4. A Logical Framework Matrix that includes all indicators and their baselines, annual target 
values, life of Activity target values, and disaggregate levels, including disaggregation by 
sex; and 
5. Outline the management of data at all stages, including data collection, storage, analysis, 
quality and reporting. 


 

In the AMEL Plan, the Recipient must identify which indicators lend themselves to geographic 
representation and report accordingly. The AMEL Plan must demonstrate how such 
geographically disaggregated indicators will be used to analyze Activity performance and inform 
management decisions. 

 

The AMEL Plan must include indicators that USAID uses in its own standardized reporting as 
well as indicators that the Recipient believes to be necessary in order to adequately measure and 
track progress and impact of the range of possible interventions. The Recipient must describe the 
rationale behind the indicators selected (relevance of the indicator, data quality, availability, cost-
effectiveness of collection, etc.) and include Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) for 
each mandatory and custom indicator. The Recipient is encouraged to keep output indicators to 
the minimum number necessary for monitoring needs and to propose innovative approaches and 
creative technologies for data collection. Outcome indicators, as opposed to output indicators, 
should be used whenever possible. Any modification to an indicator and its PIRS must be 
validated and approved by the ACOR. 

 

As part of the AMEL Plan, the Recipient must submit a CLA Plan supplement. The CLA Plan 
must describe how the Recipient will: 

 

● Collaborate with USAID, relevant government and non-governmental counterparts, and 
other stakeholders. 
● Establish a learning agenda, including opportunities to reflect on progress, review 
challenges and successes, and learn from failure. 
● Incorporate learning into the implementation of activity, including the process by which 
adjustments will be made. 


 

The plan must also include an analysis of the role of gender equality and social inclusion, private 
sector engagement, and local ownership in implementation, as well as a dedicated focus on 
overall knowledge capture and transfer at activity close out. 

 


As part of CLA, the AMEL Plan should be revised as needed in response to changes in the 
Activity or context that occur during the life of the activity, including changes to USAID 
mandatory standard indicators and indicator disaggregate categories. All changes must be 
approved in writing by the AOR. 

 

In developing the AMEL Plan, the Recipient should follow the guidance outlined in USAID’s 
How-To Note: Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, & Learning (AMEL) Plan document: 
https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/cleared_-_how-to_note_-
_activity_mel_plan_sep2017.pdf. The Recipient is highly encouraged to utilize the AMEL Plan 
template that will be provided by the AOR. 

 

The Recipient must submit AMEL data in quarterly and annual reports. 

 

In compliance with ADS 201 and ADS 579 regarding data reporting, once the AMEL Plan is 
approved by the AOR, the Recipient must create a profile in USAID Development Information 
Solution (DIS) – a web-based Agency-wide portfolio management system – for quarterly and 
annual data reporting. 

 

C. Performance Reports 
1. Quarterly Performance Reports 


 

The Recipient must submit quarterly reports that give insight into the progress of planned 
activities. The narrative report will include qualitative and quantitative information describing 
activities carried out and specific results achieved during the quarter. In addition, the narrative 
report will indicate key implementation challenges encountered and how they were, or are 
planned to be, resolved. To the extent that the AMEL Plan includes quarterly targets, this should 
be reflected in the narrative report. The report will also contain, as appropriate, lessons learned 
and recommendations for future priorities. 

 

Each report must include the following: 

 

● Name of the Activity and Implementer; award number; and period of performance; 
● Brief outline of Activity purpose and Activity approach; 
● A brief description of the political context and/or enabling environment of the country in 
which program activities are implemented. This section may include significant political 
developments and/or relevant events reported in the press or by local informants which 
affect the overall implementation environment. 
● Overall status of Activity progress towards programmatic and financial 
objectives (narrative), and trends noticed during the reporting period. This should not be a 
description of activities, but rather a broader analysis that examines the progress in the 
context of program objectives and expected results. Special emphasis should be made to 
evaluate and elaborate upon progress toward achieving sustainability of results; 
● Identify and relate the benchmarks and achievements towards planned targets, 
as identified in the Recipient’s AMEL Plan; 



● Provide status of overall Activity progress per the approved performance and 
context indicators defined in the AMEL Plan, clearly distinguishing between relevant 
components of the results framework; 
● Succinct success stories and lessons learned for possible public dissemination; 
● Verification of compliance with cost share broken down by financial and/or in-kind 
contributions; 
● Programmatic coordination and collaboration with other USAID Activities, if applicable; 
● Monitoring indicator report and screenshots of documents uploaded to the DEC during the 
quarter. 
● If any key problems or issues were encountered, how they were or will be resolved, and, if 
there are recommended Mission-level interventions to facilitate their timely resolution. 


Reporting periods will coincide with USAID fiscal year quarters, with reports due no later than 
thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter, or by any other schedule agreed upon with the 
USAID AOR. Note that a fourth quarterly report is not required separate from the Annual 
Progress Report. 

 

2. Annual Progress Reports 


 

The Annual Progress Report is due 45 calendar days after the end of the reporting period covering 
activities of the previous USG fiscal year. A Fourth Quarterly Performance Report is not required; 
the Recipient may include results from the fourth quarter within the Annual Progress Report. 

 

The report will provide a succinct presentation of achievements of activity objectives and targets 
during the year with supporting discussion to explain any shortfalls. The report will summarize 
program progress, provide an analysis of program impact based on activities completed or in-
progress, identify success stories, and suggest resolution of any outstanding issues. The Annual 
Progress Report will provide a summary of activities, accomplishments and lessons learned and 
efforts to coordinate with other USAID activities and collaborate with private sector 
stakeholders. The Annual Progress Reports will include a performance-indicator data table 
presenting the baseline, targets established for each fiscal year, and the actual annual performance 
data using indicators from the AMEL Plan. 

 

D. Financial Reporting 

 

a. Quarterly Accrual and Estimated Expenditures Report – The Recipient must submit 
the Report no later than the 10th of March, June, September and December. The Report must 
include columns for: current budget, cumulative actual expenditures through the end of the 
previous quarter, accrued expenditures through the end of current quarter, and estimated 
expenditures for remaining quarters and for the next fiscal year. The AOR will inform the 
Recipient if obligated funds are “earmarked.” If funding is earmarked, this quarterly accrual 
report will include the above information as to each earmark funding item. 
b. Quarterly Financial Reporting – Within 30 calendar days following the end of each 
USAID fiscal year quarter, the Recipient will submit electronic copies of Financial Reports 
(quarterly SF 425 and final SF 425), with a copy of the report to the AOR. 



c. Final Financial Report – In accordance with 2 CFR 200.343-344, no later than 90 
calendar days following the end of the agreement, the Recipient must submit all final financial 
reports to the Agreement Officer and AOR. 


 

E. Activity Location, Geographic and Location Data Collection and Reporting 
Requirements (January 2022) 

 

In accordance with ADS 579, USAID has established its requirements governing development 
data collection and management. The following provides requirements for reporting: 

 

1. Activity Location Data Collection and Submission Standards 
a. Activity Location Data is the geographic location or locations where an 
activity is implemented. The geographic detail at which USAID/Armenia Activity 
Location Data must be collected is the national, and, where applicable, community 
levels. 
b. Activity Location Data must be submitted electronically in Microsoft Excel 
format using the USAID/ Armenia Activity Mapping Implementation Template. 
This template describes the level of geographic detail that is required and will be 
provided by the AOR. 
c. Activity Location Data must be submitted as part of the second quarterly 
and annual progress report. 


 

2. Geographic Data Collection and Asset Submission Standards 
a. In consultation with the AOR, USAID will inform the recipient of the level 
of geographic detail at which Geographic Data must be collected and reported. 
b. In determining the appropriate geographic data collection method, the 
recipient must comply with ADS chapters 579 and 201 and Geographic Data 
Collection and Submission Standards. 
c. Geographic Data must be submitted as part of the annual progress report. 


 

3. All Activity Location Data and Geographic Data collection and submissions must 
comply with the standards set forth in ADS 579, Geographic Data Collection and 
Submission Standards. 


 

Recipients are highly encouraged to review ADS 579 saam, Geographic Data Collection and 
Submission Standards – An Additional Help For ADS 579 for supplemental guidance when 
preparing their data collection and reports. 

 

F. Special Reporting 

 

1. Depending on the final scope of activities and results indicators agreed by USAID and 
the Recipient, USAID may require additional annual reporting to fulfill Agency, 
congressional, or presidential requirements. The Recipient will be notified of these 
requirements in advance and expected to incorporate them into the AMEL Plan. 
2. Notifications - Notifications should be sent to the AO and the AOR as follows: 



● Developments which may have a significant impact on the activities supported 
by this Award; and 
● Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which materially impact the 
recipient’s ability to timely meet the objectives of this Agreement. This 
notification shall include a statement of the action taken or contemplated, and 
any assistance needed to resolve the implementation challenge. 


 

G. Demobilization Plan 

 

Six months prior to the completion date of the agreement, the Recipient will submit a 
demobilization plan for Agreement Officer approval. The demobilization plan must include a) 
draft property disposition plan, b) plan for the phase-out of in-country operations, c) delivery 
schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the agreement, and d) timetable for 
completing all required actions in the demobilization plan, including the submission date of the 
final property disposition plan to the Agreement Officer. 

 

H. Final Report 

 

The final performance report is a detailed report, which summarizes the accomplishments and 
impact in relation to the expected results, in accordance with the approved AMEL Plan. It should 
contain a three-page executive summary, an index of all reports and information products 
produced under the agreement and should discuss the elements listed in 2 CFR 200.328(b). 

 

The report must be submitted no later than 90 days after the end-date of the agreement to the 
Agreement Officer, and the AOR. In addition, an electronic copy must be submitted either: 

 

1) Online to the Development Experience Clearinghouse at: 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/submit.aspx . 

 

2) By mail (for pouch delivery): 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB m.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

 

* Note: Mail sent to USAID via the US Postal Service undergoes security and 
irradiation processing. To send sensitive items, like CDs or DVDs, please contact the 
Dec team at ksc@usaid.gov to arrange delivery. 

 

For questions on DEC submissions, contact 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

Telephone: +1 202-712-0579 

E-mail: ksc@usaid.gov 

 

 

 


I. Submission to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications 

 

Per ADS 540.3.2.3, documents and development assistance activity descriptions produced 
or funded with USAID resources and created in support of Intellectual Work must be 
submitted for inclusion in the DEC. The recipient must provide the AOR one copy of any 
Intellectual Work that is published, and a list of any Intellectual Work that is not published. 

In addition, the recipient must submit Intellectual Work, whether published or not, to the 
DEC, either on-line (preferred) or by mail. The recipient must review the DEC Web site for 
submission instructions, including document formatting and the types of documents to submit. 
Submission instructions can be found at: http://dec.usaid.gov. For purposes of submissions to 
the DEC, Intellectual Work includes all works that document the implementation, evaluation, 
and results of international development assistance activities developed or acquired under this 
award, which may include program and communications materials, evaluations and 
assessments, information products, research and technical reports, progress and performance 
reports required under this award (excluding administrative financial information), and other 
reports, articles and papers prepared by the recipient under the award, whether published or 
not. The term does not include the recipient’s information that is incidental to award 
administration, such as financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management information. 

Each document submitted should contain essential bibliographic information, such as 
1) descriptive title; 2) author(s) name; 3) award number; 4) sponsoring USAID office; 5) 
development objective; and 6) date of publication. 

The recipient must not submit to the DEC any financially sensitive information or 
personally identifiable information, such as social security numbers, home addresses and dates 
of birth. Such information must be removed prior to submission. The recipient must not 
submit classified documents to the DEC. 

In the event award funds are used to underwrite the cost of publishing, in lieu of the 
publisher assuming this cost as is the normal practice, any profits or royalties up to the 
amount of such cost must be credited to the award unless the schedule of the award has 
identified the profits or royalties as program income. 

 

4. Environmental Compliance 


 

1a) The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this RFA. 

1b) In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 


1c) No activity funded under this Cooperative Agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental 
Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation.”) 

2. An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) DCN: 2022-ARM-008 (Annex 3) has been 
approved for Media Integrity and Resilience in Armenia Activity. The IEE covers activities 
expected to be implemented under this award. USAID has determined that a Negative 
Determination with conditions applies to one or more of the proposed activities. This indicates 
that if these activities are implemented subject to the specified conditions, they are expected to 
have no significant adverse effect on the environment. 

The recipient is responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be 
funded under this award. 

4a) As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the AOR and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental 
Officer, as appropriate, must review all ongoing and planned activities under this Cooperative 
Agreement to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation. 

4b) If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it must prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities may be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

4c) Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation must be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

5) When the approved Regulation 216 documentation is (1) an IEE that contains one or more 
Negative Determinations with conditions and/or (2) an EA, the recipient must: 

5a) Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental 
mitigation and monitoring plan (EMMP) or a project mitigation and monitoring (M&M) plan, the 
recipient must prepare an EMMP or M&M Plan describing how the recipient will, in specific 
terms, implement all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed project activities within the 
scope of the award. The EMMP or M&M Plan must include monitoring the implementation of the 
conditions and their effectiveness. 

5b) Integrate a completed EMMP or M&M Plan into the initial work plan. 

5c) Integrate an EMMP or M&M Plan into subsequent Annual Work Plans, making any necessary 
adjustments to activity implementation to minimize adverse impacts to the environment. 

8a) USAID anticipates that environmental compliance and achieving optimal development 
outcomes for the proposed activities will require environmental management expertise. 
Respondents to the RFA should therefore include as part of their application their approach to 


achieving environmental compliance and management, to include: 

8b) The respondent’s approach to developing and implementing an EMMP or M&M Plan. 

8c) The respondent’s approach to providing necessary environmental management expertise, 
including examples of past experience of environmental management of similar activities. 

8d) The respondent’s illustrative budget for implementing the environmental compliance 
activities. For the purposes of this solicitation, applicants should reflect illustrative costs for 
environmental compliance implementation and monitoring in their cost application. 

5. Other Requirements 


 

a. Adaptive Management 


Responsiveness to new information and contextual changes, as well as regularly conducted 
appropriate adjustments are critical to the success of this activity. This includes regular 
consultations with USAID and relevant stakeholder, as well as the effective use of iterative 
processes (e.g., media ecosystem mapping) and key data points from monitoring, evaluation, and 
learning (MEL) and collaboration, learning, and adapting (CLA) efforts as detailed in the AMEL 
Plan. CLA approaches should be leveraged with outreach initiatives to enhance programmatic 
impact. The activity’s implementation approach to adaptive management should also examine 
how to best take advantage of the flexibility of this mechanism to respond to targeted technical 
needs or other unanticipated requests as they may arise. 

 

MEL will be a key component of the activity’s approach to adaptive management and its CLA 
agenda. The activity must develop a systematic method for collecting and analyzing performance 
data and other information to track progress toward planned results, ensure effective management 
and oversight, and enable evidence-based decision-making. The activity should provide sufficient 
human and financial resources for MEL and CLA. Relevant stakeholders/partners must be 
involved in the development of the MEL approach, to not only cultivate ownership over results 
but to also utilize the process to build their own MEL capacity. This also ensures performance 
measurement and accountability partners. 

 

Flexibility: The program will need to remain flexible as the country context changes, and work 
along a continuum of relief to development. Furthermore, the appropriate stakeholders should be 
fully engaged, and investments safeguarded throughout the implementation period and beyond. 
The flexibility may also need to be in response to emergent learning from implementation. 
Approaches, models, activities, tasks may need to be adjusted to attain the results. 

 

Ability to learn and adapt approaches based on research and program experience: USAID seeks 
to support efforts that present a vision and strategy for management that intentionally plans for 
consideration and adaptation of approaches based on program learning, experience, and inputs 
from both internal and external researchers and evaluators. 

 

Willingness to innovate in all aspects of implementation: While the interventions that activity 
partners anticipate applying may largely rely on well-documented interventions with proven 


impact, new and relatively untested approaches (or untested in the Armenia context or in this 

 

Foster a culture of knowledge sharing, performance monitoring, and adaptation: A key feature of 
the activity is a learning-by-doing approach. The recipient is expected to introduce and utilize 
harmonized CLA procedures and tools to regularly review and adapt to project progress and 
challenges. 

 
Knowledge management and communications: Experimentation is essential to innovation and 
effectiveness. The activity is expected to utilize a knowledge management methodology that 
facilitates continuous learning and adapting. Ongoing learning will allow the activity to obtain 
timely information on activity successes and allow for adjustments in activity design and 
management, as needed. 

b. Climate Risk 


All USAID projects and activities approved after October 1, 2016 are required to be assessed for 
climate risks. The process of assessing, addressing, and adaptively managing climate risks is 
known as climate risk management (see Climate Risk Management for USAID Projects and 
Activities, a Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 201 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/201mal_042817.pdf ). 

The goal of climate risk management is to make USAID’s development work more resilient to 
potential changes in climate or weather conditions – such as increasing temperatures, more 
frequent droughts or floods, or large storms. These events can have potential negative 
consequences on projects or activities, making it more difficult to achieve results. With better 
analysis and planning, USAID can anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to these changing conditions 
and avoid inadvertently increasing our exposure to risk. 

Climate risk is the potential for negative consequences due to changing climatic conditions 
where the outcome is uncertain. The focus of climate risk management at USAID is on the risk 
to USAID development programs. This risk consists of individual climate risks—potentially 
severe adverse consequences for development programs resulting from the interaction of 
climate-related hazards with the vulnerability of societies and systems exposed to climate 
change. A climate risk may arise when something is exposed to a climate stressor such as 
higher temperatures, flooding or drought. The level of risk increases as the magnitude of the 
negative consequence from the exposure increases and it also increases as the likelihood of the 
negative consequence increases. 

 

c. Limiting Plastic Pollution and Mismanaged Waste (March 2020) 


 

Environmental stewardship is a USAID priority, including preventing ocean pollution 
from mismanaged plastic waste. USAID seeks to model environmentally aware practices. 
As such, the recipient is encouraged to use alternatives to disposable products to reduce 


environmental impacts. Further, the implementing partner should identify opportunities to 

 

d. Branding and Marking Requirements 


 

It is a federal statutory and regulatory requirement that all USAID programs, projects, 
activities, public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds 
under a USAID grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award or sub-award, 
must be marked appropriately overseas with the USAID Identity. See Section 641, 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended; 2 CFR 700.16. 

 

The Recipient will follow the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan as approved by the 
Agreement Officer and as incorporated into this Cooperative Agreement. See Attachment 
_ [to be completed at time of award]. The Branding Strategy and Marking Plan will be 
implemented in accordance with standard provision M.13 Marking and Public 
Communications Under USAID-Funded Assistance. 

 

All final communication assets (e.g., public and media documents, marketing materials, 
speeches, and event preparation forms, press coverages) will be provided to the Mission’s 
Development Outreach and Communications (DOC) team. This is to ensure that USAID is 
aware of all public communication about the agency in Armenia and that USAID is aware 
of how to promote the activity’s assets and impact on the USAID social media pages, 
press when appropriate, and to USAID/Washington. 

 

e. Management and Operational Considerations 


The Recipient must ensure proper oversight and management. Where possible, the 
Recipient is encouraged to minimize the use of expatriate staff. 

When providing subawards, the Recipient must comply with USAID’s policy regarding 
subawards as described in ADS 303.3.21. The Recipient is required to submit a subawards 
manual at the startup of the activity. 

 

6. PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN TELECOMMUNICATION AND VIDEO 
SURVEILLANCE SERVICES OR EQUIPMENT (JULY 2022) 

 

a. In accordance with the cost principles in 2 CFR § 200.471, obligating or expending costs for 
covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment or services as 
described in 2 CFR § 200.216 are unallowable. Recipients and subrecipients are prohibited from 
using award funds, including direct and indirect costs, cost share and program income, for such 
covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment. 

This provision implements temporary waivers granted to USAID under Section 889(d)(2) that 
allow the recipient to use award funds for: 

 


 (1) All costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or 
equipment incurred through September 30, 2022; and 

 

(2) Costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment 
incurred on or after October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2028, only if the recipient has 
determined that there is no available alternate eligible source for the covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment. 

 

b. After September 30, 2028, in accordance with 2 CFR § 200.471 costs of all covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR §200.216 
will be unallowable. 

 

c. The Recipient must include this provision in all subawards and contracts issued under this 
award. 

 

END OF SECTION F 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

Name: Abdullah Akbar 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email: abakbar@usaid.gov 

 

The Acquisition and Assistance Specialist is: 

 

Name: Narine Sarkisian 

Title: Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

Email: nsarkisian@usaid.gov 

 

Questions and requests for clarifications should be addressed to: 

Narine Sarkisian 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

Email: yerevanaidaao@usaid.gov 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

END OF SECTION G 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

END OF SECTION H 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

The Applicant is required to submit SF 424 and 424A forms. Also, a detail summary budget for 
all five years (per each year separately) of the activity should be submitted according to the 
template below. 

BUDGET TEMPLATE - Include ONLY those cost line items that are consistent with your 
technical application 

COST ELEMENTS 

PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 

 

Year 1 

A. Salaries and Allowances 

Daily Rate 

LOE days 

Total Cost 

1. Long-Term Technical Assistance (LTTA) 

 

 

 

LTTA LOCAL STAFF 

 

 

 

 TOTAL Long-Term Technical Assistance 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Short-Term Technical Assistance (STTA) 

 

 

 

STTA Local/Expatriate/TCNs 

 

 

 

 TOTAL Short-Term Technical Assistance 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Administrative Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL Administrative Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL Allowances 

 

 

 

Total Salaries and Allowances 

 

 

 




B. Fringe Benefits 

Rate 

Units 

Total Cost 

 

 

 

 

Total Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

C. Travel and Transportation 

Rate 

Units 

Total Cost 

International Travel 

 

 

 

Local Travel 

 

 

 

Per Diem 

 

 

 

Total Travel and Transportation 

 

 

 

D. Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & 
Supplies), Services, and Real Property 

Rate 

Units 

Total Cost 

 

 

 

 

Total Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property 

E. Subawards 

Rate 

Units 

Total Cost 

 

 

 

 

Total Subawards 

 

 

 

F. Other Direct Costs (ODCs) 

Rate 

Units 

Total Cost 

 

 

 

 

Total ODCs 

 

 

 

G. Indirect Costs 

Rate 

Base 

Total Cost 

 

 

 

 

Total Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL USAID COST 

 

 

 

 




H. Cost Share 

Rate 

Units 

Total Cost 

 

 

 

 

Total Cost Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL PROGRAM COST 



 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

X 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

X 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 

 

X 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

X 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

X 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 

 

X 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 




 

X 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

X 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

X 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

X 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

X 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 

 

X 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

X 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 




X 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

X 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

X 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

 

X 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 


ANNEX 3: INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 

 

See Attachment – Annex 3 


ANNEX 4: ASSISTANCE BRANDING STRATEGY, MARKING PLAN AND STRATEGIC 
COMMUNICATION PLAN GUIDANCE 

 

USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, activities, public communications, or commodities 
implemented or delivered under co-funded instruments – such as grants, cooperative agreements, 
or other assistance awards that usually require a cost share – generally are “co-branded and co-
marked.” In accordance with 2 CFR 700.16, this policy applies to these assistance awards even 
when the award does not require any cost sharing. (see ADS 303.3.10). Please note that while 
USAID promotes a consistent approach to branding and marking across all the Agency’s 
programs and maintains a brand identity that they are “from the American People.” 

 

“Co-branding” and “co-marking” means that the program, project, or activity marking represents 
both USAID and the implementing partner. 

 

Every Apparent Successful Applicant must submit a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan. The 
following provides guidance in developing such Branding Strategy and Marking Plan. 

 

Branding Strategy 

 

USAID seeks a very high level of public visibility for this activity through co-branding. Co-
branding helps show unification between USAID and partners. 

 

The Applicant must develop its Branding Strategy. In order to expedite the review and approval 
of the proposed Branding Strategy, the Apparent Successful Applicant should include: 

● Activity Name: The name of the activity is TBD. In every public event or document and 
in discussions with the Government of Armenia and other counterparts, the Recipient will 
identify the activity as “TBD” on each reference. 

● Communicate Sponsorship: USAID is mandated to mark its foreign assistance with the 
USAID identity (logo) and tagline, “From the American People.” Therefore, in all 
USAID-funded and related activities, the activity will consistently highlight USAID 
through co-branding. The following provides details regarding where and how such 
USAID Identity will be used: 

a. TEXTUALLY: 

[Example: Recipient will include references to USAID in all printed outreach and 
communications materials, including but not limited to, reports, press releases, 
website content, social media postings, invitations, publications, fact sheets, 
presentations, and promotional materials relating to the activity.] 

b. VERBALLY: 

[Example: Recipient will ensure that USAID is publicly credited in all verbal 


outreach and communications activities, including but not limited to, speeches, 
press conferences, media interviews, presentations, training workshops, videos, 
films, public service announcements, and community meetings when referencing 
the activity.] 

c. VISUALLY: 

[Example: USAID’s identities will be co-branded on all outreach and 
communications materials, including but not limited to, reports, press releases, 
website content, invitations, publications, fact sheets, presentations, videos, films, 
public service announcements, banners, and other promotional materials.] 

d. WHEN ENGAGING WITH THE MEDIA: 

[Example: USAID will be acknowledged at all media events and in reporting on 
the activity. Successes and achievements of the development objectives should be 
credited to USAID’s assistance as appropriate through dissemination of press 
materials, including but not limited to, press releases, media interviews, op-eds, 
etc. Media coverage of the work may include. but not be limited to, radio, local 
TV, videos, films, webcasts, and print (magazines, newspapers, etc.).] 

e. THROUGH DIGITAL CONTENT (Websites, Social Media, Blogs, etc.): 

[Example: USAID will be acknowledged appropriately through all Recipient’s 
social media channels and content about the activity. All visual content about the 
activity published through the Activity’s digital channels will be co-branded with 
the USAID logo, although the logo will not be used as the profile picture. Efforts 
will be made to communicate USAID’s sponsorship to the activities on these 
digital products when appropriate.] 

In addition, the Branding Strategy should describe: 

 
Activity Description 
Provide a basic description of the activity in simple language. Avoid jargon, abbreviations, and 
explain what the activity is doing, how it’s accomplishing its objectives, and why the work is 
important. 
Branding and Marking Objectives 
List the branding and marking objectives that complement the activity’s programmatic objectives 
and communicate USAID’s support to the activity. The objectives should directly support the 
activity’s development objectives. The objectives can range from an increase of awareness, 
encourage behavior change, increase support, encourage adoption of best practices, etc. 


Audiences 
List the activity’s external audiences. The audiences are those who are the decision makers that 
are critical to achieving the activity’s development objectives. In addition, people who influence 
those decision makers are also part of the key audiences. 


 Be specific and clear about your target audiences and user groups and prioritize them according to 
importance and influence relative to your objectives. Don’t just think about the ‘usual suspects’ 
and think beyond just the actual “recipients” of the assistance. 
Key Messages 
The awardee needs to develop key messages to explain the “what,” “how” and “why” aspects of 
the activity to explain the important work of the activity to its key audiences. The message 
triangle must include a WHAT, HOW, and WHY statement as described below. 
a) WHAT: This is the problem we are working to solve and provides the reason why our goals are 
within reach. A successful “what” statement provides our audience with a reason to believe. 
b) HOW: Here we explain the method we will use to achieve our goals through our unique 
position. 
c) WHY: The “why” message appeals to the common interest and values of our audiences. It 
connects to their sense of reason and emotion, and it tells them why they should care. 
Communications Activities 
The apparently successful applicant will outline communication activities that are designed to 
achieve the communications objectives. The activities should be in line to achieve a very high-
level of public visibility through an array of communications activities, media coverage, and 
social media engagement. 
We recommend that the apparently successful applicant conduct research on what existing 
publications, online platforms, events, conferences, and information sources the apparently 
successful applicant can tap into in order to reach the activity’s key audiences. 
Communications activities can include but are not limited to: launching the program; online 
campaigns; community events; announcing research, reports or publications; email marketing; 
spotlighting trends in the sector; highlighting activity impact or beneficiaries stories; media 
briefings, contests; community awareness activities; and media visits to the activity sites. 
This section should also outline the types of communications products that will be developed 
through this activity and how these tools will be used to publicize the activity in the host country. 
Such products can include but not limited to the following: 

 

● High quality, action-oriented photos of the activity’s interventions 
● Press releases; 
● Press conferences; 
● Media interviews; 
● Site visits; 
● Success stories; 
● Testimonials from beneficiaries; 
● Professional photography; 



● Public Service Announcements (PSAs); 
● Videos; 
● Webcasts; 
● E-invitations or group emails; 
● Social media; and 
● Other Internet activities, etc. 


 

The communications activities and products should be part of the activity’s Strategic 
Communications Plan and will be incorporated into the Activity’s Implementation Plan. 
Success Criteria 
The apparently successful applicant will need to develop measurement tools to determine whether 
the strategy has successfully achieved the communications objectives of the activity. These 
metrics will be incorporated into the monitoring and evaluation plan of the award. 

 

Marking Plan 


In accordance with 2 CFR 700.16, a Marking Plan means a plan that details the public 
communications, commodities, and program materials and other items that will visibly bear the 
USAID Identity. 

 

USAID policy is that all programs, projects, activities, public communications, and commodities 
must be marked appropriately overseas with the USAID Identity, of a size and prominence 
equivalent to or greater than the recipient's, other donor's or any other third party's identity or 
logo. Program materials include the examples set forth in 2 CFR 700.16. 

 

USAID reserves the right to determine that a program’s goals require that the USAID Identity be 
larger and more prominent, if USAID is a majority donor and the USAID-funded program, 
project or activity is especially important to USAID; any such requirement will be on a case-by-
case basis depending on the audience, activity goals and materials produced. 

 

To the extent possible, the apparently successful applicant will provide the text that will be used 
to acknowledge USAID support on printed communication materials and products as well as for 
the verbal acknowledgement of USAID at events. 

 

We recommend that the apparently successful applicant create a table and list the public 
communications materials and products that will be co-marked. Deliverables to be co-marked 
include but are not limited to the following: 

● Products, equipment and inputs delivered; 
● Plaques, signs or banners for places where activities or technical assistance are carried 
out; 
● External public communications such as media invitations, press releases, online success 
stories, beneficiary testimonials, professional photography, brochures, leaflets, and fact 
sheets; 
● Public services announcements, videos, DVDs, CDs, posters, newsletters, publications, 
and mass distribution of electronic mail sent for program purposes; 



● Studies, reports, research results, training manuals, workbooks, guides, and evaluations; 
● Letterhead used for program-related purposes (Invitations to workshops, trainings, 
seminars, public events, etc.), as opposed to apparently successful applicant administrative 
purposes; 
● PowerPoint or program related presentations; 
● Newspaper supplements, advertisements, and other paid placements; and 
● Signs and banners at public events such as press conferences, briefings, seminars, 
exhibitions, workshops, conferences, fairs, and trainings. 
● Website pages and other online external pages. 


 
Studies, reports, publications, Web sites, and all informational and promotional products not 
authored, reviewed, or edited by USAID must contain a provision substantially as follows: 
This study/report/Website (specify) is made possible by the support of the American People 
through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The contents of this 
(specify) are the sole responsibility of (name of organization) and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of USAID or the United States Government. 

 

If an implementing partner intends to mark with its own logo, the strong presumption is that 
marking with the USAID Identity is also required. The apparently successful applicant may 
request approval of presumptive exceptions in their submitted Marking Plans. Exceptions are 
programmatic in nature and reflect the categories of foreign assistance that USAID generally does 
not want marked. See 2 CFR 700.16 [g-h] and M.13 Marking and Public Communications Under 
USAID-Funded Assistance (December 2014) for additional guidance. Waivers to the market 
requirements are discussed in ADS 320.3.2.6 and 320.3.3.3. 

 

Further, to ensure that the marking requirements “flow down” to subrecipients of subawards, 
recipients of USAID funded grants and cooperative agreements or other assistance awards are 
required to include a USAID-approved marking provision in any USAID funded subaward, to 
read as outlined in CFR §700.16. 

 

Strategic Communications Plan 

 

The Recipient will develop a Strategic Communications Plan as part of their Initial 
Implementation Plan detailing the overarching communications efforts and tools it will use to 
achieve widespread awareness, knowledge, and understanding of the Activity’s objectives and 
results among key stakeholders and the Armenian public. The plan must state the Activity’s 
strategic communications objectives and detail how the Recipient will achieve these objectives 
when creating deliverables and conducting other communications activities (e.g., media 
engagement, community mobilization, and use of social media). In formulating this plan, the 
Recipient must ensure that USAID’s contribution to the achievement of communication and 
programmatic objectives are significantly recognized by the Activity’s potential audience, as 
appropriate. Based on this Strategic Communications Plan, the annual implementation plan will 
identify specific outreach and communication deliverables and strategic communication activities 
for the upcoming year; the annual progress report will report on such deliverables and activities. 

 


Social Media 

In accordance with ADS 558, under cooperative agreements and grants, sites will reflect USAID 
co-branding policies and regulations as stated in ADS 320 and 2 CFR §700.16. Sites funded 
by multiple partners will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by USAID and other partners. 


The apparently successful applicant must prepare a complementary social media strategy that is 
incorporated in the Branding Strategy. Social media must only be used for the project’s 
development objectives and no other purpose. 

 

All digital content to promote the project including but not limited to, digital success stories, 
promotional videos, infographics, must be provided to the AOR and the DOC team and 
distributed via the official USAID/Armenia social media platforms. The apparently successful 
applicant must determine the appropriate clearance process for posting content to the project’s 
official social media account. 

 

USAID reserves the right to have social media accounts closed if the AO, in consultation with the 
AOR and DOC, determines that the applicant is not using these platforms appropriately (see 
558.3.1.5 for appropriate activity usage). 

 

Websites 

Websites that are produced under USAID-financed assistance instruments and fall outside the 
scope of ADS 557.3.4 must comply only with USAID branding guidelines. The apparently 
successful applicant must notify of the URL as far in advance of the site's launch as possible. The 
web sites must not reside on a .gov domain. 

 

The site must be marked appropriately on the index page of the site and every major entry point to 
the Website with a disclaimer that states: 

 

"The information provided on this Website is not official U.S. Government information and does 
not represent the views or positions of the U.S. Agency for International Development or the U.S. 
Government." 

 

[END OF NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


