Issue Date: 
November 4, 2022 
Deadline for Questions: 
November 15, 2022, 10:00 AM Tbilisi Time 
Closing Date: 
December 16, 2022 
Closing Time: 
10:00 AM Tbilisi Time 


Subject: 
Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number: 
72011423RFA00001 


Program Title: 
USAID Educating the Future Activity 


Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 Foreign Assistance for 
Programs Overseas 


To Whom it May Concern: 


The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the USAID Educating the Future 
Program. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. See Section C of this Notice of Funding 
Opportunity (NOFO) for eligibility requirements. 


USAID intends to make an award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO, subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. The evaluation process will include oral presentations by all applicants, to 
be conducted virtually. Further information is included in Section D of this NOFO. 


To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility 
of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on 
www.grants.gov 
or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov 
for technical 
assistance. 


USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 



72011423RFA00001 


Section D.6.g. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. 
Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 


Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 


Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted 
at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 


Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 


Sincerely, 
(Signer's identity unknown) Signed by Deborah G. Perlman <dperlman@usaid.gov> Time: 2022.11.04 14:52:05 +04'00'


Deborah Perlman 
Agreement Officer 
USAID/Georgia 


pg. 
2 



72011423RFA00001 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Section A – Program Description 
Section B – Federal Award Information 
Section C – Eligibility Information 
Section D – Application and Submission Information 
Section E – Application Review Information 
Section F – Federal Award Administration Information 
Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 
Section H – Other Information 


pg. 
3 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 


This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 


1. 
TITLE OFACTIVITY 
The USAID Educating the Future Activity 


2. 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Program is to strengthen the quality and equality of the general education 
system in Georgia. The activity will support the Government of Georgia (GoG) in enhancing the 
quality of pre-service teacher education programs; building the capacity of school administrators 
as instructional leaders; and strengthening the implementation of decentralization policies with a 
specific focus on refining the roles and responsibilities of Educational Resource Centers (ERCs) 
and improving their capacity to support schools. 


The activity will work towards the following three objectives: 


Objective 1: Enhance the quality and inclusiveness of pre-service teacher education 


programs 


Objective 2: Improve school governance 


Objective 3: Support the decentralization of the basic education system 


3. BACKGROUND 
In 2022, the Government of Georgia (GOG) approved the 
National Education and Science 
Strategy of Georgia 2022-20321. The government has 
identified three broad goals for national 
reforms aimed at enhancing education 1) quality and relevance; 2) equity, inclusion and diversity; 
and 3) governance, funding and accountability. 


The strategy indicates that, in order to improve the quality of teaching, the government will make 
efforts to secure access to and increase the retention of effective teachers and educators at all 
levels of education. Over the next ten years, important reforms will be launched and implemented 
in the preparation and induction of educators, their continuing professional development, and in 
their career systems, including systems for appraisals and incentives. The Ministry of Education 
and Science’s (MoES, or the Ministry) ten-year strategy also highlights how the government will 
promote school self-governance by using support from ERCs to enhance the autonomy of schools 
and strengthen the capacity of principals and teachers in order to improve their ability to function 
autonomously. 


Quality: Georgian children have almost universal access 
to primary education, yet that has not 
translated into widespread access to quality primary education. Despite Georgia’s National 


1Thestrategy 
is 
currently 
available 
only 
in 
Georgian. 


pg. 
4 



72011423RFA00001 


Education and Science Strategy calling for a focus on “learner-centered” approaches, a World 
Bank study found that Georgia’s education system continues to place too much emphasis on rote 
memorization, instead of teaching problem-solving and critical thinking.Georgia is ranked lower 
in education quality than comparable middle-income countries in the region such as Moldova, 
Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. About 35 percent of fourth graders possess less than the minimum 
required knowledge and skills in mathematics, and 40 percent have less than the minimum 
required skills in reading. Ethnic minority schools and classrooms struggle to provide quality 
instruction due to the scarcity of well-educated, native-language-speaking teachers or teachers 
that can instruct in both Georgian and ethnic minority languages. The gap in learning outcomes of 
Georgian and Azeri students is equivalent to more than three years of school. 


The National Education and Science Strategy 2022-2032 states that “Over the last five years, on 
average 15-20 percent of pupils with a basic education diploma (9th grade) discontinued their 
education after a compulsory level or failed in school-leaving examinations at 11-12th grades. 
Many who abandon school are left without any formal further education opportunities. In Unified 
National Exams, which determine the entry to higher education, the failure rate ranges from 25 
percent to 35 percent. Delayed completion and low completion rates reduce the efficiency in 
higher education.” 


Gender stereotypes prevail in Georgia’s general education: female students attain better learning 
outcomes in primary grades, yet negative gender norms persist in younger generations due to 
gender-biased teaching materials and teachers with higher expectations for boys. Gender bias 
carries over into the professional world, where women are less likely to be hired for higher paying 
jobs in proportion to their learning achievements. 


Governance: 
Georgia’s general education system includes 
twelve years of study and is carried out 
at three levels: Primary (elementary), equivalent to grades 1-6; Lower Secondary (basic), 
equivalent to grades 7-9; and Upper Secondary, equivalent to grades 10-12. Georgia’s 2,075 
public schools, most of which provide all three levels of general education, enroll approximately 
608,000 students. The general education system is predominantly dispersed across small rural 
schools and classrooms, half of which have less than 100 students, and approximately 60 percent 
have less than 200 students. However, in urban areas, public schools are often overcrowded with 
classrooms utilizing a shift system to accommodate more students. The student-teacher ratio is 
approximately 9:1 which is significantly lower than the OECD average of 24:1. In rural areas the 
ratio can be as low as 2:1 and in urban areas as high as 15:1. 


Georgia’s general education system is based on a “school-based management” model, also known 
as school autonomy. Schools are governed by elected school boards representing the whole 
spectrum of the school community: parents, teachers, and students. Formally, school boards have 
the power to select school principals, approve school budgets, and approve school curricula; in 
reality, however these powers are not exercised, leaving little room for autonomy and 
independence. 


In such a highly centralized system, an intermediary level of management could play a crucial 
role towards education decentralization and autonomy. Currently, Georgia’s general education 
system also includes 69 territorial ERCs, one in each administrative center of Georgia. Each ERC 
is staffed by a team of four to five individuals, who are responsible for coordination between 
schools and the Ministry. ERCs are the administrative arm of the Ministry, with no particular role 


pg. 
5 



72011423RFA00001 


in school management or strategic direction. The Ministry’s 10-year education strategy envisions 
the creation of a middle-level management unit, so called “school districts,” built on ERCs. ERCs 
that take on the role of school districts will have enhanced roles and responsibilities in planning 
and overseeing the activities of their schools. 


In Georgia, school principals are expected to be instructional and managerial leaders; however, 
they lack the capacity to act as instructional leaders. They have little access to a sustainable, 
continuous professional development training system, and are not supported at the time of 
induction. The 
majority of school principals are not 
trained in school management before 
becoming school principals, and only 60 percent receive training after their appointment 
(Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS), 
2018). 
The 
TALIS research showed that 
school principal participation in professional development activities in Georgia is lower than in 
other surveyed countries and the participation rate is even lower among principals in rural 
schools. With increased internet connectivity, new forms of professional development 
opportunities can be identified. 


Pre-service teacher training programs and school teachers: 
Georgia introduced teacher 
certification requirements in 2007 where teachers had to demonstrate minimum competency in a 
subject as well as in pedagogy. Unfortunately, the majority of teachers failed to demonstrate the 
minimum required level of knowledge when they took the certification exams. In general 
education, teachers lack competencies in student-centered teaching and assessment methods, and 
only one in ten has passed the professional skills and subject exams with the minimum 
requirement. In addition, the average age of a teacher in Georgia is 50. This means that most 
teachers graduated within the Soviet system, which was teacher-centered as opposed to 
student-centered. In comparison, the average age of teachers across OECD countries and 
economies participating in TALIS is 44. These demographics mean that Georgia will have to 
renew more than 50 percent of its teaching workforce over the next decade. 


According to the Teacher Education and Development Study of Mathematics (TEDS-M), 
an 
international survey of future math teachers, 
Georgia came last in a survey of 17 countries (the 
Russian Federation, Botswana, Canada, Chile, Germany, Malaysia, Norway, Oman, the 
Philippines, Poland, Singapore, Thailand, the United States, Chinese Taipei, Spain, and 
Switzerland) for both subject knowledge and pedagogy. TEDS-M examined how different 
countries have prepared their teachers to teach mathematics in primary and lower-secondary 
schools. Georgian future math teachers scored the lowest in terms of subject knowledge as well as 
pedagogical knowledge. Fortunately, there is an increased interest in the teaching profession 
which is reflected in concrete policies and figures. Enrollment rates at universities for teacher 
training programs are significantly increasing. Between 2010 and 2021, the GoG gradually 
increased teacher compensation from GEL 290 to GEL 1,010, introduced a teacher professional 
development scheme, and diversified ways to enter the teaching profession. This resulted in 
increased student enrollment rates for pre-service teacher training programs, although there is an 
increased need for primary grade, foreign language, math, civic education and many more subject 
specific teachers. Despite progress, a lingering issue is the limited competencies and skills of 
students enrolled in pre-service teacher training programs. According to a State Audit report 
published in May 2022, there is a deficit of qualified teachers in the regions, and teachers often 
teach more than three or four unrelated subjects. 


pg. 
6 



72011423RFA00001 


In addition, there is a great shortage of qualified teachers in ethnic minority regions. There should 
be a particular emphasis on enhancing the quality of teacher training programs in and for ethnic 
minority regions, as well as popularizing the teaching profession by introducing the teaching 
profession to high achieving students from those communities. 


4. PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Education plays a life-changing role around the world, creating the opportunity and potential for 
development and change. Children need quality education which will help them to fully achieve 
their potential and increase their chances of becoming happy, healthy, successful, and contributing 
members of society. The core problem faced by Georgia’s education system is the quality and 
inclusiveness of the general education system. The following direct causes lead to this core 
problem: 


1. 
The poor quality of pre-service teacher education programs; 
2. 
The fact that current and future school administrators lack the skills and practice they need 
to become instructional and management leaders in their schools; and 
3. 
The central management of general education, leaving only a minor role for middle-level 
management, and a resulting lack of school autonomy that leaves little room for 
school-level innovation. 
Georgia ranks lower for education quality than other regional middle-income countries. In 2021, 
Georgia scored 0.62 in Education Quality, falling behind Ukraine (0.72), Kazakhstan (0.86), and 
Russia (0.91). According to the international survey, Georgian pre-service teaching students 
underperform in subject knowledge as well as pedagogy. Teachers fail to demonstrate the 
minimum qualification of knowledge in their certification exams and use teacher-centered 
techniques rather than implementing student-centered tools and approaches. In addition to the 
poor quality of teacher training programs, most school principals are not trained in school 
management before taking up their positions, and only 60 percent receive training after their 
appointment. Principals lack the tools and resources to manage their schools and there is no 
systemic approach to the professional development of school principals in addition to the weak 
recruitment policies for principals which do not require adequate prior experience. The 
centralized education system does not provide technical support to schools and underutilizes the 
resources of the Educational Resource Centers. 


Access to and ability to use digital tools and technologies in the teaching and learning process are 
limited across all levels of the Georgian education system. COVID-19 forced a rapid adoption and 
integration of technology in the classroom, although connectivity challenges, availability of 
online resources and platforms, and skills gaps prevail as obstacles to digital transformation in the 
education system. 


Furthermore, the Georgian education sector lacks a strong level of engagement with the private 
sector to help address weaknesses in the administration and quality of pre-service teacher training. 
While the private sector has been playing a more active role in technical and vocational education, 
its 
engagement in general or higher education institutions remains nascent. Without the 
engagement of relevant private sector entities in teacher preparation, gaps in education outcomes, 
in areas such as mathematics, information communication technologies, and Science, Technology, 


pg. 
7 



72011423RFA00001 


Engineering and Math (STEM) are likely to grow. Several leading companies in Georgia have 
prioritized investing in education as part of their corporate sustainability and corporate social 
responsibility efforts. However, this has not translated into collaboration and co-investments to 
the education system, specifically its administration, teacher education, and educational 
resources. 


4.1 THEORY OF CHANGE 
5. PROGRAM OBJECTIVES 
This 
activity 
aims 
to 
strengthen 
the 
quality 
and 
inclusiveness 
of 
the 
general 
education 
system 
in 
Georgia. The activity has three main objectives: 


Objective 1: Enhance the quality and inclusiveness of pre-service teacher education 
programs 


1. 
1.1: Enhance the teaching and learning quality of existing pre-service teacher programs 
1.2: Promote recruitment for higher-education teaching programs (with an emphasis on ethnic 
minorities) 
pg. 
8 



72011423RFA00001 


Objective 2: Improve school governance 


2.1: Improve the quality and inclusiveness of existing or new higher-education programs for 
education administrators 
2.2: Strengthen GoG school governance policies and provide continuous professional 
development opportunities for school administrators 
Objective 3: Support the decentralization of the general education system in Georgia 


3.1: Strengthen GoG decentralization policies with a focus on ERCs 
3.2: Support the continuous professional development of ERC staff 
Objective 1: Enhance the quality and inclusiveness of pre-service teacher education 
programs 


The goal of Objective 1 is to strengthen the quality of teacher training programs and ensure that 
program graduates have the knowledge and skills necessary to integrate student-centered 
pedagogies and inclusive approaches, including Universal Design for Learning (UDL), into 
instruction. Under this objective, the activity will aim to strengthen the quality and inclusiveness 
of existing pre-service teacher education programs, and to increase the number of high-achieving 
students enrolling in teacher education programs, including ethnic minority students. The activity 
will also ensure that teacher education programs include relevant gender training, including 
approaches to address the stereotypes and practices recurring in Georgia’s education system. 


Expected results: 


Sub-objective 1.1: Enhance the quality and inclusiveness of existing pre-service teacher programs 


Intended outcomes of Sub-objective 1.1: 


● 
Improved curriculum for pre-service teacher programs with a focus on preparing future 
teachers to deliver student-centered, gender sensitive instruction based on UDL. 
● 
Strong professional partnerships established with international higher education 
institutions; 
● 
Steps identified to enable international accreditation and strategic plans developed with 
universities to put them on the path to international accreditation; 
● 
Strengthened deep, sustained, and mutually beneficial partnerships between Universities 
and the public schools. 
The activity will aim to improve the quality and inclusiveness of existing pre-service teacher 
programs (PSTP) in up to three universities in Georgia by developing Centers for 
Excellence/Schools of Success within a small set of public and/or private university programs. 
Through close partnerships with international universities, the activity will conduct an initial 
assessment to identify and engage Georgian universities in international partnerships. The 
assessment should also identify Georgian universities' capacity to carry out and sustain 
partnerships with other international universities. key strengths and challenges facing each 
university and PSTP program, and opportunities to build on and strengthen these areas through 
international partnerships. Working with international universities, the Georgian universities will 
leverage key learnings, good practices, and capacity building opportunities to strengthen PSTP to 
ensure graduates acquire sufficient skills and knowledge to deliver quality, inclusive, and 


pg. 
9 



72011423RFA00001 


developmentally appropriate instruction. The activity should critically examine primary 
regulating legislative documents: sectoral benchmarks and accreditation standards and conduct 
comparative analysis with the best international practices. Additionally, the universities, where the 
Centers for Excellence/Schools of Success are developed, will seek to collaborate with other 
Georgian universities to share best practices and approaches to strengthen teacher preparation 
programs. 


The activity will seek to strengthen teacher preparation 
programs with an emphasis on revising or 
developing the curriculum to prepare teachers to integrate student-centered and inclusive 
approaches in the classroom, including practices for gender equity and UDL. The activity will 
collaborate with targeted universities to revise and improve the curriculum for teacher education 
programs, including a focus on theory, pedagogy, and in-school practicums. Curriculum 
development or revision activities will ensure that teachers have the necessary content and 
pedagogical skills and knowledge to provide gender-sensitive, contextually and developmentally 
relevant hands-on instruction for all learners. To solidify classroom-based learning, it is important 
for future teachers to gain teaching practice through practicums or student teaching experiences. 
Pre-service teacher education programs should include partnerships with public or private 
schools, particularly schools participating in the USAID Basic Education Program, to provide 
opportunities for future teachers to gain hands-on experience in student-centered teaching 
approaches. 


In addition to revising the PSTP curriculum and programmatic components, the activity will 
support institutional capacity building, ensuring teacher educators and professors are equipped to 
provide quality instruction and support to future teachers. Teacher educators should receive 
training and support to implement the revised curriculum and to integrate principles of gender 
equity and UDL to provide inclusive learning environments for future teachers. 


Sub-objective 1.2: Promote recruitment for higher education teaching programs (with an 
emphasis on ethnic minorities) 


Intended outcomes of Sub-objective 1.2: 


● 
Increased enrollment in teacher education programs of high achieving students, with 
particular emphasis on ethnic minorities and other underrepresented groups in Georgia. 
The activity will also aim to promote recruitment for higher education teaching programs, with an 
emphasis on ethnic minorities, male students, students with disabilities, and other 
underrepresented groups, to increase the number of students enrolling in teacher preparation 
programs. The activity will aim to understand the root causes for why high-achieving school 
graduates do not enroll in teacher preparation programs by using positive youth development 
approaches and engaging youth. The activity will seek to identify and implement approaches to 
address and mitigate these challenges, to advocate for policy reforms, and to attract and enroll 
high-achieving candidates in teacher preparation programs. Popularizing and increasing the 
attractiveness and prestige of the teaching profession is a key priority of this activity. The activity 
should identify incentives and support mechanisms to attract high-achieving students into the 
field and use social media and diverse channels to improve the public image of the teacher 
profession. The activity should conduct targeted outreach by proactively contacting 
underrepresented segments of the teacher population; introduce advantages of the profession and 


pg. 
10 



72011423RFA00001 


success stories and provide additional preparation opportunities for underrepresented populations 
to prepare for certification exams. 


Objective 2: Improve school governance 


The goal of Objective 2 is to increase the quality and inclusiveness of new and existing higher 
education programs for education administrators, including 
in minority groups, to support GoG 
school governance policies, and to provide continuous professional development for education 
administrators. This objective aims to strengthen the school governance system by supporting 
education administrators to serve as effective instructional and institutional leaders by 
successfully managing the implementation of student-centered learning approaches, the principles 
for UDL, and best practices for gender equity. 


Expected Results: 


Sub-Objective 2.1: Improved quality and inclusiveness of new or existing higher education 
programs for education administrators. 


Intended outcomes of Sub-objective 2.1: 


● 
Strengthened and/or new higher education programs for education professionals; 
● 
Increased capacity of and preparation for education administrators to provide management 
and supervision in their current or future schools or any other role in the field of education 
administration. 
The activity will aim to improve the quality and inclusiveness of new or existing higher education 
programs for education administrators. The activity will aim to leverage the university 
partnerships established under Objective 1.1 to strengthen 
existing or develop new programs, as 
appropriate, to support the professional development of education administrators. 


Through an initial landscape analysis, the activity will identify universities that are interested in 
developing or enhancing programs for education administrators. Based on these findings, the 
activity will develop and implement an approach to strengthen the quality and inclusiveness of 
higher education programs for education administrators, ensuring they develop key knowledge 
and skills needed to manage education programs, to attract and retain a diverse group of teachers, 
and to build the pedagogical and content knowledge needed to effectively work with teachers and 
act as mentors to teachers. The approach for strengthening education administrator professional 
development should be rooted in evidence from the landscape assessment, and could include 
strengthening the capacity of higher education instructors, supporting the processes for resource 
development, revising the curriculum for education administrators, and strengthening linkages 
with local schools to provide opportunities for mentorship and observation. The approach should 
involve key stakeholders, such as faculty, and include a shared vision among stakeholders. 


Sub-objective 2.2: Support GoG school governance policies and provide continuous professional 
development for school administrators. 


Intended outcomes of Sub-objective 2.2: 


● 
Enhanced policy and regulatory frameworks for school administrator recruitment, 
retention, promotion, professional development, school governance; 
pg. 
11 



72011423RFA00001 


● 
Strengthened continuous professional development systems and opportunities for school 
administrators; 
● 
Enhanced skills and knowledge in both newly elected and established school principals. 
The Activity will review current policies for school governance and education administrator 
recruitment, retention, and promotion in order to provide recommendations to strengthen existing 
policies and to fill gaps in policies, particularly policies related to gender equity and disability 
inclusiveness. The Activity will conduct an assessment on the existing regulatory framework for 
school administrators to better understand the current context, the strengths and weaknesses 
within the system, and identify challenges and areas for improvement. Building on these findings, 
the Activity will work with the GoG and wider stakeholders to develop a policy outlining 
expectations and plans for education administrator recruitment, retention, promotion, and 
professional development. 


The Activity will also support the delivery of continuous professional development for school 
administrators through an online learning management system (LMS) platform. The system and 
its e-learning modules will be revised to incorporate the new performance standards and the 
content will be developed to reflect the key skills and knowledge needed to effectively manage 
schools, including modules on school governance and management, financial and human resource 
management, gender equity, learner-centered pedagogy, and UDL. Particular attention will be 
paid to ensuring that the online learning system incorporates best practices in e-learning, UDL, 
and instructional design. The Activity will aim to create professional development opportunities 
for school administrators that are tailored to their job requirements and aligned with existing 
online platforms. Mentoring and coaching are additional professional development opportunities 
that should be considered to support school administrators. 


Objective 3: Support the decentralization of the general education system 


The goal of Objective 3 is to support the decentralization of the general education system in 
Georgia. The Activity will support the GoG’s decentralization policies, with a particular focus on 
strengthening the ERCs. Additionally, under Objective 3, the Activity will support the continuous 
professional development of ERC staff. 


Sub-objective 3.1: Strengthen GoG decentralization policies with a focus on ERCs 


Intended outcomes of Sub-objective 3.1: 


● 
Improved and consistent implementation of education decentralization policies. 
The activity will assist the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia (MoES) to implement 
effective and efficient school support 
policies and mechanisms. 
The activity will work closely 
with the MoES and other relevant entities to identify the current needs and challenges related to 
education decentralization. Based on that analysis, the Activity will develop professional 
development activities for policy makers to introduce diversified approaches considering 
contextual factors and needs to effective decentralization and strengthen their ability to implement 
decentralization within the school system. 


Sub-objective 3.2: Support the continuous professional development of ERC staff 


Intended outcomes of Sub-objective 3.2: 


pg. 
12 



72011423RFA00001 


● 
ERC staff roles and responsibilities better aligned with the decentralization policy 
framework; 
● 
New professional development opportunities available for ERC staff. 
To further support the MoES strategy to strengthen the decentralization process, the Activity will 
aim to enhance the abilities of ERC staff, and other key stakeholders in the decentralization 
process, to provide improved support to schools. The activity will implement a needs assessment 
to better understand how the ERCs currently function, including their current roles and 
responsibilities, and the challenges they face in supporting schools. Based on the needs 
assessment and the revised policy framework, the activity will update and revise the roles and 
responsibilities for ERC staff to align with the decentralization policies, clearly define 
performance standards for ERC Staff members, and develop a professional development approach 
aligned with these standards. The activity should propose a diversified approach to the school 
support system considering all relevant factors which are characteristic to the municipality as well 
as considering differentiated needs and priorities of schools. The Activity will build on the online 
LMS platform for school administrators to also manage and deliver continuous professional 
development for ERC staff. 


6. OPERATING PRIORITIES AND POLICY GUIDANCE 
The following operational guidance will be crucial for the successful and sustainable 
implementation of this activity. These priorities and guidance relate to: a) Collaboration with 
USAID/Georgia and US Embassy Programming; and b) Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
(MEL). 


6.1. Collaboration with USAID/Georgia and US Embassy Programing 
The Activity should closely collaborate with the ongoing USAID/Georgia and US Embassy 
Public Diplomacy Section 
education programming. Currently, USAID funds two Basic 
Education programs described below, and there will be other opportunities for collaboration 
and joint activities with youth and local governance programs under the Democracy, Rights 
and Governance office and the USAID Industry-Led Skills Development program under the 
Economic Growth office. 


The six-year (2020-2026) 
USAID Basic Education Program 
aims 
to assist Georgia’s 
education system to implement sustainable student-centered reforms in the primary grades. 
The USAID Basic Education Program objectives are: 1) Current primary grade teachers and 
administrators implement student-centered curricula; 2) Future teachers acquire 
student-centered teaching skills and future administrators acquire relevant instructional 
leadership skills; and 3) Educational policies are developed with the use of data and evidence. 
As a system-wide reform, the program will impact all stakeholders in the primary education 
sector in Georgia, including: primary grade students and their families, teachers and 
administrators, universities, local organizations, and the Ministry of Education and Science. 
The program aims to institutionalize student-centered instruction through far-reaching 
systemic reforms of pre-service and in-service teacher professional development and the use of 
research and data to inform policy and classroom practice. At the end of the program, the 


pg. 
13 



72011423RFA00001 


Georgian education system will have the capacity to implement nationwide reforms grounded 
in student-centered instruction. 


The current 
USAID Basic Education Program 
and the 
USAID Educating the Future Activity 
(when awarded) should have close partnerships particularly considering similarities under 
Objective 2 under the USAID Basic Education Program and Objective 1 under the USAID 
Educating the Future activity. 


The USAID Civic Education Program 
(2022-2027) will 
use civic education to prepare the 
next generation of Georgians to be civically engaged, support them to understand and exercise 
their democratic rights and responsibilities, harness technology, and build partnerships, 
including with the private sector, to advocate for increased government accountability. USAID 
civic education work focuses on developing a more democratic culture in schools, introducing 
innovative approaches to extracurricular and experiential/project-based learning, establishing 
new forms of partnership including with the private sector, and preparing teachers and students 
to benefit from digital resources. The new program’s objectives include: 1) Enhance 
student-led civic and democratic engagement in schools; 2) Strengthen engagement of the 
private sector in civic education at the school level; and 3) Students improve their ability and 
proficiency to responsibly use and harness technology to advance their civic agendas and 
participate in public discourse. 


The activity should collaborate with other ongoing projects under USAID/Georgia’s 
Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance Office and Economic Growth Office. In addition, 
the activity should coordinate efforts with relevant U.S. Embassy Public Diplomacy Section 
activities that occur during project implementation. 


6.2. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) will be an integral part of this activity. MEL will 
be an on-going, collaborative process led by the awardee, with the participation of USAID and 
other key stakeholders. Below are the basic indicators that USAID/Georgia included in the 
Mission’s Performance Management Plan (PMP) to measure the performance of the activity. 
However, these indicators are not exhaustive. Illustrative indicators as well as any additional 
indicators need to be disaggregated as appropriate (including sex, geography, etc) from the 
start of the activity and key terms should be defined. 


Many of the indicators listed below are being reported on by the ongoing USAID Basic Education 
Program. It would be to the benefit of the two programs to consult with each other regarding the 
definitions, methodology and data for these indicators. 


List of Performance Management Plan (PMP) Indicators 


● 
IR 2.2-5 
Percent of learners who attain a minimum 
grade-level proficiency in reading at the 
end of grade 2 and grade 6 with USG assistance 
● 
IR 2.2-6 
Percent of learners who attain a minimum 
grade-level proficiency in math at the end 
of grade 2 and grade 6 with USG assistance 
pg. 
14 



72011423RFA00001 


List of Performance Plan And Report (PPR) Indicators 


● 
ES.1-6 - Number of educators who complete professional development activities with 
USG assistance 
● 
ES.1-3 - Number of learners in primary schools or equivalent non-school based settings 
reached with USG education assistance 
● 
ES 2.54: Number of USG-supported partnerships that address regional, national, and/or 
local development objectives through or with higher education institutions 
● 
ES 2-1 Number of host country higher education institutions receiving capacity 
development support with USG assistance 
● 
CBLD-10 Value ($) of non-donor resources mobilized for local development priorities 
6.3 Universal Design for Learning 
Guided by Universal Design for Learning (UDL): The Educating the Future activity will approach 
all interventions using principles of UDL based upon the premise that all children and youth learn 
differently and as a result, the activity needs to provide learners with pathways to (1) be engaged, 
motivated and to learn through multiple means, (2) receive information in various ways, and (3) 
express their learning in multiple ways. 


Universal Design for Learning 
is a framework to improveand optimize teaching and learning for 
all people based on scientific insights into how humans learn. The goal of UDL is to support 
learners to become “expert learners” who are purposeful and motivated, resourceful and 
knowledgeable, and strategic and goal driven. Instead of changing the learner, UDL aims to 
change the design of learning environments to reduce barriers so that all learners can engage in 
rigorous, meaningful learning. UDL Guidelines provide a set of concrete suggestions that can be 
applied to any discipline or domain to ensure that all learners can access and participate in 
meaningful, challenging learning opportunities. 


6.4 USAID 
Digital Strategy 
USAID’s Digital Strategy 
charts an Agency-wide vision 
for development and humanitarian 
assistance in the world’s rapidly evolving digital landscape. The Digital Strategy seeks to improve 
measurable development and humanitarian assistance outcomes through the responsible use of 
digital technology and to strengthen the openness, inclusiveness, and security of country-level 
digital ecosystems. According to a study conducted by the National Assessment and Examination 
Center, before the pandemic, 79 percent of students were using computers with internet access 
either at home or at school, 69 percent of villages had poor internet connection, and 42 percent of 
teachers had not been trained in the usage of ICT technologies. The USAID Educating the Future 
Activity will aim to include Digital Development and digital technology approaches in a 
cross-cutting manner, where appropriate, to achieve the three program objectives. This will 
include supporting the creation/adaptation and implementation of digital tools with the goal of 
improving operations, and quality of teaching and learning. The Activity will include the 
appropriate technology in the context of the education ecosystem in Georgia, including 
opportunities for linking systems and data, leveraging technologies already in place, and 
accelerating and amplifying outcomes under the program objectives. The Activity will reflect key 


pg. 
15 



72011423RFA00001 


considerations from the Principles for Digital Development into any technology-oriented 
interventions. 


6.5 Private Sector Engagement 
USAID’s Private Sector Engagement (PSE) Policy 
calls 
for USAID staff and partners to actively 
assess the role of the private sector and use of market-based approaches in approaching 
development issues for greater development outcomes. Implementing partners play a vital role in 
advancing the PSE Policy by actively engaging relevant private sector partners, embracing 
market-based approaches, and integrating the unique capabilities of the private sector in 
addressing development challenges across sectors. 


The Activity should integrate private sector engagement in its approach to achieve all three of the 
program’s objectives. As a result, it is expected that private sector providers are actively engaged 
and co-invest their resources to enhance the quality and inclusiveness of pre-service teacher 
education programs. For example, as an impact of the program 
more students from 
underrepresented regions receive access to quality teacher education through private 
sector-supported interventions such as scholarships and thematic competitions. 
It is expected that 
relevant private sector partners are engaged to collaborate in improving school governance. 
School governance and administration should benefit from private-public dialogue. 
The Activity 
should engage private sector entities that can advance the decentralization of the system of 
general education. The Activity should actively explore how private education institutions can 
actively contribute financial and non-financial resources to improve education outcomes at all 
levels. The Activity should engage relevant companies in the ICT sector to co-create 
digital 
solutions for education administration and teacher education. 


6.6 Communication 
Communication is a vital component of the activity. The Activity is expected to integrate strong 
communication and outreach activities within each objective to ensure linkages and coordination 
between various education stakeholders, including but not limited to USAID-funded basic 
education activities, local schools and universities, and MoES entities. 


Intended results: 


● 
Teaching profession popularized among school children; 
● 
Partnerships 
developed 
to 
strengthen 
linkages 
between 
international 
universities 
and 
Georgian universities; 
● 
Communication 
and 
coordination 
between 
local 
universities 
and 
local 
schools 
strengthened; 
● 
Collaboration among educators enhanced through multiple activities; 
● 
Communication and collaboration between ERCs and schools strengthened. 
6.7 Coordination and Collaboration 
The Activity is expected to coordinate with all donors who are active at the time of project 
implementation. This list includes but is not limited to: the World Bank, Asian Development Bank 
and UNICEF. 


pg. 
16 



72011423RFA00001 


6.8 Sustainability 
The Activity turns on a sustainable vision - affecting universities, schools and the general 
education system in general. Engagement with key institutional partners, including but not limited 
to Universities, MoES and its agencies, ERCs, and schools, will be critical to promoting the 
sustainability of the Activity objectives. 


6.9 Gender 
The gender analysis for the Activity is rooted in the Mission’s Gender Analysis2 
for the 
2020-2025 Country Development Cooperation Strategy, USAID/Georgia’s 2018 Gender Analysis 
in Education, and a number of credible third party sources, including reports and analyses by the 
World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and UNICEF. 


The analysis has identified specific gender disparities and stereotypes impeding girls’ equal and 
equitable inclusion in the education sector. The findings have been integrated throughout this 
program description. The related statistics are also summarized below and the Activity should 
identify specific measures to address the identified gaps. 


Gender disparities are deeply ingrained across the education sector, including lower participation, 
access, and education outcomes for male students in upper secondary, to a significantly low 
numbers of male teachers or administrators in all schools, to a lack of awareness of and sensitivity 
towards gender equity and equality in both the teaching community and wider society. These 
disparities are compounded by established societal gender norms and stereotypes that set rigid 
expectations about the roles women and men should or should not play in the education sector. 


The Activity should incorporate and build on the analysis and its findings and reflect how the 
prevailing gender disparities and stereotypes will be addressed by the activity. 


UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) 2021 showed that Georgia has a high 
drop-out rate from school at the upper secondary level: only 66 percent of children complete 
upper secondary. In this group, males are overrepresented (55 percent). 
The out-of-school 
children rate is also high, 11 percent among upper secondary age group children, and the out of 
school rate among males is 14 percent (compared to females at 8 percent). MICS also found that 
more boys than girls do not have access to the internet. The latest 2018 PISA analyses show that 
girls outperform boys across all domains and in reading and sciences this difference is statistically 
significant. USAID/Georgia’s gender analysis towards the CDCS in 2019 found that female 
students are outperforming their male peers at all levels, though despite these higher levels of 
educational performance, gender disparities in employment opportunities persist. USAID/Georgia 
gender analysis also points to the fact that there are only a small number of male teachers in 
Georgian schools, which can reinforce the perception that teaching is a female profession. Gender 
stereotypes and prejudices are reinforced through textbooks, instructional practice, teachers, and 
parents and educators lack the appropriate training to deliver gender-sensitive approaches at the 
pre and in service levels for teachers. 


2Availableon 
the 
Development 
Experience 
Clearinghouse. 


pg. 
17 



72011423RFA00001 


6.10. Staffing and Management 
The 
Recipient 
must 
have 
the 
necessary 
mix 
of 
staff 
and 
requisite 
levels 
of 
professional 
expertise 
to 
implement 
the 
activity 
and 
should 
identify, 
recruit, 
hire, 
and 
support 
appropriate 
personnel. 
The 
Recipient 
must 
supply 
Key 
Personnel 
essential 
to 
the 
work 
to 
be 
performed 
under 
the 
award. 
Key 
Personnel 
are 
expected 
to 
be 
in-country 
(if 
applicable) 
and 
fully 
engaged 
by 
no 
later 
than 
60 
days 
after 
the 
award’s 
effective 
date. 
When 
qualified 
personnel 
are 
available, 
the 
Recipient 
should 
utilize local personnel with appropriate experience and expertise. 


The 
Recipient 
is 
expected 
to 
commit 
to 
gender 
equality 
and 
social 
inclusion 
and 
should 
consider 
equitable 
balance 
in 
staffing 
and 
staff 
requirements; 
personnel 
systems, 
hiring, 
and 
management; 
and capacity development principles and approaches. 


Professional-level 
skills 
and 
management 
practices 
are 
required 
in 
the 
performanceof 
the 
activity. 
Accordingly, 
the 
Recipient 
will 
be 
expected 
to 
establish 
an 
effective 
quality 
control 
program 
to 
assure 
that 
deliverables 
and 
other 
products 
meet 
professional 
standards 
and 
comply 
with 
terms 
and conditions of the Agreement. 


The 
Recipient 
should 
have 
an 
organizational 
structure 
that 
adequately 
meets 
management 
needs 
to implement all initiatives and manage needs within each of the geographic areas. 


END OF SECTION A 


pg. 
18 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION B: FEDERALAWARD INFORMATION 


1. ESTIMATE OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OFAWARDS CONTEMPLATED 
USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency. USAID intends to 
provide up to $14,000,000 in total USAID funding over a 5-year period. 


2. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE INDICATORS, TARGETS, BASELINE DATA, AND 
DATA COLLECTION 
In line with the proposed Results Framework, the Recipient will develop an Activity MEL (MEL) 
plan which will include a set of corresponding quantitative and qualitative indicators that would 
directly measure proposed outcomes and outputs. 
This will include, but will not be limited to, 
appropriate Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators (F indicators) as mandated by USAID.. 
The 
Recipient must develop the baselines for indicators as appropriate and set final targets for each of 
the proposed indicators for the duration of the program. 


The F indicators that apply to this activity are: 


IR1: Quality of Programs for Future Teachers Enhanced 


● 
ES.2-1: Number of host country tertiary education institutions receiving capacity 
development support with USG assistance 
● 
ES.2-2: Number of individuals attending tertiary education institutions with USG 
scholarship or financial assistance 
● 
ES 2.54: Number of USG-supported partnerships that address regional, national, and/or 
local development objectives through or with higher education institutions 
IR2: School Governance Improved 


● 
ES.1-6 - Number of educators who complete professional development activities with 
USG assistance 
● 
ES 2-1 Number of host country higher education institutions receiving capacity 
development support with USG assistance 
IR3: Education Decentralization Supported and Sustained 


● 
ES.1-6 - Number of educators who complete professional 
development activities with 
USG assistance 
Cross-cutting: Private Sector Engagement: 


● 
CBLD-10 Value ($) of non-donor resources mobilized 
for local development priorities 
The Recipient is responsible for developing clearly defined and fit-for-purpose data collection 
methods for all indicators to inform continuous learning and adaptations for maximum activity 
impact. The Recipient is also responsible for storage, analysis, reporting as well as ensuring the 


pg. 
19 



72011423RFA00001 


quality of indicator data, including those provided by any sub-awardees. The Recipient must 
ensure the validity, integrity, precision, reliability, and timeliness of data used for measuring 
performance of the Activity and informing decision making. All externally reported indicators 
must have a data quality assessment (DQA). The Recipient is also encouraged to be creative and 
innovative about learning and adapting methods that are outside of what has been described 
herein. 


In order to better represent the results of USAID-funded activities, USAID requires 
geographically disaggregated indicators. Such indicators include information on the location or 
geographic scale of the Activity's performance, impact, or other information as deemed 
appropriate by USAID or the Recipient. Geographically disaggregated indicators enable the 
Activity to investigate the variation in performance to inform USAID decision-making and any 
adaptation to continually refine the activity over its four-year life. 


The time it takes to ascertain potential baselines will depend on the nature of the indicators and 
their data sources, including data collection when needed. The final targets will be determined 
once the baseline is established. It is generally expected that all such baseline and target 
information must be included in the MEL Plan. 


1. 
START DATE AND PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE FOR FEDERALAWARDS 
The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years from signing of the Cooperative 
Agreement. The estimated start date will be March/April 2023. 


2. 
SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 
Substantial involvement during the implementation of this Agreement must be limited to approval 
of the elements listed below. An Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) will substantially be 
involved in the administration and be responsible for review and approval of the following 
components of a cooperative agreement to help the implementer achieve the agreement objectives 
in the following areas in accordance with ADS 303.3.11: 


● 
Review and approval of Recipient’s Annual Work Plan. 
● 
Review and approval of Recipient’s Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 
(MEL) Plan and amendment/s to the MEL Plans. 
● 
Review and approval of substantive provisions of proposed subawards or contracts. The 
Agreement Officer will approve all subawards unless the authority is delegated to the 
AOR. 
● 
Review and approval of the specified key personnel assigned to the positions in the “Key 
Personnel” Section. The Agreement Officer will approve any changes to Key Personnel 
following technical concurrence by the AOR. 
● 
Agency monitoring to permit direction or redirection of the work because of the 
interrelationships with other projects or activities, or based on communications with the 
Government of Georgia. All such direction or redirection must be within the program 
description budget, and other terms and conditions of the award. 
pg. 
20 



72011423RFA00001 


KEY PERSONNEL 


The three 
Key Personnel positions for this Cooperative Agreement are: Chief of Party, Deputy 
Chief of Party, and 
Senior Program Advisor for University 
Education. Minimum Qualifications 
for the Key Personnel are as follows: 


The 
Chief of Party (COP) 
must have a master’s degree 
in a relevant field and at least 10 years 
of 
work experience. The COP candidate must have held progressively responsible positions 
managing large-scale development programs, preferably in the Europe and Eurasia region; 
managing programs in education is required. 


The COP must demonstrate a thorough understanding of the issues surrounding education and 
ability to effectively manage a diverse team of employees. 


The COP must have experience in building relationships with the host governments, international 
donors, program stakeholders and beneficiaries. 


The COP should have experience with fostering experimentation and encouraging programmatic 
risks where warranted; familiarity with performance management, project management, and 
reporting requirements is a must. 


The COP must also have strong interpersonal skills and demonstrated ability to network and 
maintain effective working relationships with diverse sets of actors, including universities, private 
sector representatives, and the local governments. Fluency in English (both verbal and written) is 
required. 


The 
Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) 
must have a master’s 
degree in education or other relevant 
field; minimum 7 years of experience working in the field of education and preferably with donor 
funded programs. Knowledge of the Georgian education system is required. 


DCOP must have experience overseeing administrative components of projects such as 
procurement, human resources 
activities. The DCOP must have professional experience in a 
management position on multi-component programs and demonstrated ability to effectively 
manage staff. 


The DCOP must have the strong interpersonal skills necessary to maintain good relations with 
formal and informal civic groups, partners, government officials, USAID, and other personnel 
associated with this program. Fluency in English (both verbal and written) is required. 


The 
Senior University Education Advisor 
must have 
a master's degree and a minimum 7 years 
of experience working on higher education 
issues. The 
Senior University Education Adviser must 
be familiar with the administrative and teaching and learning processes in universities and have 
experience working for a university in a relevant capacity (for example teaching, project 
administration). 
The Senior University Education Adviser must have knowledge of international 
best practices of innovative teaching practices, and an understanding of the role of modern digital 
tools, technologies and platforms in the teaching and learning process. 


pg. 
21 



72011423RFA00001 


The Senior University Education Advisor must 
have 
strong interpersonal skills, and the ability to 
establish and maintain strong business relations between the selected international and local 
universities, implementing partners, government officials, and donors. Fluency in English (both 
verbal and written) is required. 


USAID encourages Applicants to propose highly qualified Georgian or regional key personnel. At 
least one of the three key personnel should have a background in private sector engagement. 


3. 
AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 
The authorized geographic codes for procurement of goods and services under this award are 937 
(the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source) and 110 (the United 
States, the independent states of the former Soviet Union, or a developing country, but excluding 
any country that is a prohibited source). 


4. 
NATURE OFTHE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 
The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the USAID Educating 
the Future Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The Recipient will be responsible for 
ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration 
of the award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume 
responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, 
program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 


END OF SECTION B 


pg. 
22 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 


1. 
ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 
Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 


U.S. and non-US organizations may participate under this NOFO. 
Pursuant to Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 
award profit under assistance instruments such as cooperative agreements. 
While for-profit firms 
may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 700.13(A)(1) Prohibition against profit, no funds will be paid 
as profit to any for-profit entity receiving or administering Federal financial assistance as a 
recipient or subrecipient, and as such, for-profit organizations must waive profits and/or fees to be 
eligible to submit an application. 


USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. USAID will not accept applications from individuals. Faith-based 
organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial assistance on the same basis as any other 
organization and are subject to the protections and requirements of Federal law. 


Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant(s) may be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer (AO). 


The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is required 
to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills or ability to 
obtain them in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. 


2. COST SHARING OR MATCHING 
Cost sharing is suggested, but not required. Such funds may be provided directly by the recipient; 
other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors; host governments; and local organizations, 
communities and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of 
activities at the country level. This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or 
other facilities or equipment which may be used for the program, provided by the recipient. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and cooperative agreements see 2 CFR 200.306. 


3. OTHER 
In support of the Agency’s interest in fostering a larger assistance base and expanding the number 
and sustainability of development partners, USAID encourages applications from potential new 
partners. When considering making an award to a potential partner with limited or no previous 
USAID experience, USAID will undertake necessary pre‐award reviews to determine the 


pg. 
23 



72011423RFA00001 


organization’s “responsibility” as discussed below. The resultant award to this organization may 
take some time. The applicant should take this into account and plan their implementation dates 
and activities accordingly. 


“Responsibility” of Applicant: 


In order for an award to be made, the Agreement Officer must make an affirmative determination 
that the applicant is “responsible.” A positive responsibility determination means that the 
applicant possesses or has the ability to obtain the necessary management and technical 
competence to plan and carry out the program to be funded, and that the applicant will practice 
mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. 


Exclusive Commitments: USAID discourages any applicant from requiring exclusive 
commitments by local organizations to participate as part of the consortium or sub-award. Local 
organizations participating in a consortium may elect to participate in another consortium under a 
different application. 


END OF SECTION C 


pg. 
24 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 


1. 
AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT 
Name: 
Ekaterine Gamezardashvili 
Title: 
Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 
Email: 
egamezardashvili@usaid.gov 
AND 
rcocaucasus@usaid.gov 
Mail Address: 
Regional Contracting Office, 29, Georgian American Friendship Avenue, 


Tbilisi 0131 Georgia 


2. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to Ekaterine Gamezardashvili 
via email ategamezardashvili@usaid.gov 
AND 
rcocaucasus@usaid.gov, 
no later than the date 
and time indicated on the cover letter. Any information given to a prospective Applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an 
amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary for submitting applications or if the 
lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 


3. 
PREPARATION OFAPPLICATIONS 
Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: The Technical Application and the Business (Cost) 
Application. This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full 
application. Please see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to 
the Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address 
technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and 
address risk and other related issues. 


Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 


● 
Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● 
Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 
alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone 
number and email address); 
● 
Program name; 
● 
Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 
● 
Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303). 
Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied 


pg. 
25 



72011423RFA00001 


by evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 


Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as 
part of the merit review criteria. 


Applications must comply with the following: 


● 
USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● 
Written in English. 
● 
Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page with consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and Applicant’s name. 
● 
10 point font can be used for graphs, charts and text boxes. Tables must comply with the 
12 point Times New Roman requirement. 
● 
Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in unlocked Microsoft Excel format. 
● 
The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● 
The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● 
The cost application must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 
Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do 
so may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 


The Cost/Business Application is to be submitted under separate cover from the technical 
application. The Applicant is requested to submit a budget broken down by program years (in 
MS Excel with formulas unlocked) with an accompanying detailed budget narrative (in Word 
or PDF text accessible) which provides in detail the total costs for implementation of the 
program. 


Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose should mark the title page with 
the following legend: 


“This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government and 
shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose other than to 
evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this Applicant as a result of – or in 
connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government shall have the right to 


pg. 
26 



72011423RFA00001 


duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting grant. This restriction 
does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is 
obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 


and mark each sheet of data it wished to restrict with the following legend: 


“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 


of this application.” 


Name: 


Title: 


Email: 


Mail Address: 


4. 
APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 
Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Applications must be submitted by email to 
rcocaucasus@usaid.gov 
and egamezardashvili@usaid.gov. 
Late applications may be considered 
at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the 
form of {system generated documentation of delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the 
receiving office/certified mail receipt}. 


Email submissions must include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line 
heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also 
indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of 
the emails and their attachments (e.g., “No. 1 of 4,” etc.). For example, if your cost application is 
being sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that states: “[NOFO number], 
[organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2.” 


USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, i.e., that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 


After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a “corrected” submission. Do not send the same 
email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a “corrected” 
email. 


Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 


pg. 
27 



72011423RFA00001 


application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 


5. 
TECHNICALAPPLICATION FORMAT 
The technical application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection for 
award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The technical application should be specific, 
complete, and presented concisely. The Technical Application in response to this solicitation must 
address how the Applicant intends to carry out the Program Description contained in Section A. It 
should clearly demonstrate how the Applicant will meet the goals and objectives of the program 
and fulfill the Applicant’s program implementation responsibilities. The application should take 
into account the requirements of the program and evaluation criteria found in this NOFO. 


Technical applications shall be organized by the technical evaluation criteria listed below. The 
Technical Application is limited to 25 pages excluding pages identified below. Any pages beyond 
these 25 will NOT be evaluated. However, required Annexes specified below will not be counted 
towards the page limit. 


Required Order of the Technical Application: 


1. 
Cover page: The cover page must not exceed one page and must contain information as 
specified in Section D.3 for the cover page of the Technical and Business (Cost) 
Applications (not included in the 25-page limit) 
2. 
Table of Contents (not included in the 25-page limit) 
3. 
Abbreviation list (not included in the 25-page limit) 
4. 
Executive summary: must provide a maximum two-page high-level overview of key 
elements of the Technical Application (not included in the 25-page limit) 
5. 
Technical Approach (15-page limit) 
6. 
Management and Staffing Approach (5-page limit) 
7. Organizational Capacity (5-page limit) 
8. 
Required Annexes (not included in the 25-page limit) 
a. 
Résumés for Key Personnel (not to exceed 3 pages each); 
b. 
Letters of Commitment for Key Personnel (exclusive commitments are not 
recommended). 
1.1 Technical Approach 
The Technical Approach Section should include information sufficient to evaluate the application 
under the Technical Approach Criterion. 


The Technical Approach should describe the applicant’s overall approach and specific activities 
for achieving the objectives in the Program Description in Section A of this NOFO. The technical 
approach should be innovative, creative, realistic, sustainable, and scalable, and tailored to the 
Georgian education system. Proposed activities should respond to the identified challenges in the 
program description. The application should clearly describe how the applicant envisages 


pg. 
28 



72011423RFA00001 


ensuring effective engagement of the private sector and establishment of strong private sector 
partnerships; incorporation of technological solutions and platforms; building local capacity and 
ownership; and including realistic steps towards ensuring sustainability of interventions after the 
end of the program. The technical application should also include a description of the applicant’s 
approach to Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and proposed indicators which accurately 
measure the achievement of results, set high yet realistic targets which can be used for timely 
management decisions, and can credibly measure the actual performance of the activity. 


Oral Presentation 


As part of the application process, all applicants will give an oral presentation. Applicants must 
describe their approaches to achieving the objectives listed below. The information presented 
should be consistent with the written application but should not simply repeat orally the 
information that is in the written application. 


● 
Enhance the teaching and learning quality of existing pre-service teacher programs 
● 
Strengthen GoG school governance policies and provide continuous professional 
development opportunities for school administrators 
● 
Integrate Digital tools and technologies across all three objectives 
Oral Presentation - Logistics, Format and Content 


The factors below highlight the requirements of the oral presentation. The Selection Committee 
will evaluate each oral presentation, in accordance with the evaluation factors set forth under 
Section E. 


A. Logistics & Format 
1.Applicants will be notified of the date of their scheduled presentation. At this time, USAID 
anticipates such Oral Presentations to take place the week of January 16, 2023, subject to further 
change. Presentations will commence between 1500 and 1700 Tbilisi time. Specific logistic 
information will be provided. 
2. Oral presentations will occur via videoconferencing utilizing the Google Meet platform. 
3. The Applicant may have up to six (6) participants deliver the presentation. Offerors are 
encouraged, but not required, to include as presentation participants potential core management 
personnel, such as those the Applicant may consider to recruit as key personnel if selected for 
award, as well as include other consortium members as participants, particularly the university 
partners and/or those from local organizations. There is no obligation that such core management 
personnel or other local organizations be part of the presentation team. Participants from local 
entities as well as key or core management personnel that are considered for recruitment by 
multiple Offerors are not precluded from participating in multiple oral presentations. 
4. The audience for the Oral Presentations will consist of the Selection Committee (SC), the 
Agreement Officer, and other Office of Acquisition & Assistance and USAID staff as observers. 
The Agreement Officer will chair the Oral Presentations. USAID may, however, use in-house or a 
contracted moderator to facilitate the presentations. 
pg. 
29 



72011423RFA00001 


5. The presentation must last no more than 40 minutes, which will be followed by a 20-minute 
question and answer period. 
6. The Selected Applicant is expected to be the “Presenter” of any Power point or similar 
presentation deck. Should there be any technology failures during videoconferencing, the 
Agreement Officer, at its sole discretion, will determine if and to what extent reasonable 
accommodation of additional time may be provided. 
B. Oral Presentation Format 
1. Selected Applicants may utilize a PowerPoint or similar presentation slide deck as supporting 
materials to the presentation. The slide deck should include a cover slide that identifies 1) the 
Applicant and other organizations that will be part of the Applicant’s consortium; 2) date of 
presentation; 3) Activity title; and 4) names, position title and organization of those specifically 
participating in the presentation. 
2. There is no limitation to the number of slides the Applicant may utilize; however, the SC will 
only review slides that are shown as part of the presentation. The SC will not review these slides 
prior to the oral presentation. Any slides that were not incorporated into the presentation within 
the allocated time will be excluded from evaluation consideration. 
3. Presentation materials must be submitted by no later than 2:00 pm the Friday prior to the week 
of presentations. The final deadline for the presentation materials will be provided when 
Applicants are notified of the date of their presentation. 
1.2 Management Approach and Staffing 
The Management Approach and Staffing section should include information sufficient to evaluate 
the application under the Management Approach and Staffing criterion. The Management 
Approach and Staffing section should describe the applicant’s 
proposed 
management structure 
and demonstrate how it is consistent with the technical approach, including how the proposed 
organizational structure, roles and the team, staffing and partnerships maximize flexibility and 
adaptive management. Applicants must propose individual candidates for all key personnel 
positions listed in Section B of this NOFO. The Management Approach and Staffing section 
should describe how the Key Personnel meet the minimum qualifications and how their 
qualifications, experience, past performance and skills are applicable to the roles/positions being 
proposed. 


In support of the Key Personnel section, the applicant will also provide resumes/CVs of key 
personnel and an organizational chart in an annex. Resumes/CVs for key personnel may not 
exceed 3 pages in length. Each key personnel resume/CV will include at least 3 references within 
the last 3 years, along with an email address and phone number for each reference. The references 
may be listed on a fourth page. 


The applicant should submit letters of commitment for key personnel in an Annex. Exclusive 
commitments are not recommended. 


pg. 
30 



72011423RFA00001 


1.3 Organizational Capacity of University 
(Partner or Prime) 
To implement sub objective 1.1 
and sub-objective 2.1 
of the Program Description, Applicants are 
expected to partner with international universities in order to 
enhance the teaching and learning 
quality of existing pre-service teacher programs and to improve the quality and inclusiveness of 
existing or new higher-education programs for education administrators in Georgia. If the 
Applicant is a university and will be using its own resources for the activity, it should describe its 
own capacity in this section. The Organizational Capacity section should describe the partner 
university’s (or the Applicant’s) teacher education programs including programs that address 
delivering inclusive education, innovating teaching methodologies, education leadership and 
technology-based courses. The applicant should also describe the human resources, including 
both administrative and academic personnel, that will work closely with universities with local 
Georgian universities. The Application should provide information on the approach to the 
sustainability of partnerships with Georgian universities and proposed measures for how to retain 
the impact of the interventional after the lifetime of the project. 


6. 
BUSINESS (COST) APPLICATION FORMAT 
The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 


Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 


The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 


a) 
Cover Page 
(See Section D.3 above for requirements) 
b) 
SF 424 Form(s) 
The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at 
www.grants.gov 
or 
using the following links: 


Instructions for 
SF-424 
http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-instruct 
ions.html 
Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 
https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 
Instructions for 
SF-424A 
http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-instruc 
tions.html 
Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 
https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 


pg. 
31 



72011423RFA00001 


Instructions for 
SF-424B 
http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-instru 
ctions.html 
Assurances (SF-424B) 
https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 


Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 


c) 
Required Certifications and Assurances 
The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 


(1) 
“Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mav 


(2) 
Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) 
Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 
d) 
Budget and Budget Narrative 
The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file with visible formulas and references 
and must be broken out by project year, including itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost 
share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells.Budgets with 
hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make the award and may result in a 
rejection of the cost application. 
The Budget Narrative 
must contain sufficient detail to allow 
USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address 
any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget 
Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that 
the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 


The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 


• 
Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal 
and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template 
• 
Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient 
to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
• 
Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federalfunding and cost share, broken 
out by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 
The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 


pg. 
32 



72011423RFA00001 


1) 
Salaries and Allowances 
– Must be proposed consistent 
with 2 CFR 200.430. The 
applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, and salary 
escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down 
by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in 
other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies 
on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific 
element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the 
rationale used and supporting market research. 
2) 
Fringe Benefits 
– (if applicable) If the applicanthas a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of 
its approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant 
may propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the 
Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe 
benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. 
dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 
3) 
Travel and Transportation 
– Provide details to explainthe purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies, not to exceed the U.S. State Department rates. When appropriate 
please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, 
and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 
4) 
Procurement or Rental of Goods 
(Equipment & Supplies), 
Services, and Real Property 
– 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost 
per unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment 
and supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the 
necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of 
comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the 
type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 
5) 
Subawards 
– Specify the budget for the portion of 
the program to be passed through to 
any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity 
is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same 
requirements as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 
6) 
Construction 
– not applicable 
7) 
Other Direct Costs 
– This may include other costs 
not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. 
The applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences 
pg. 
33 



72011423RFA00001 


and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates 
of costs. The Applicant should include adequate funding for Branding and Marking and 
other outreach costs. 


8) 
Indirect Costs 
–Applicants must indicate whether 
they are proposing indirect costs or 
will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see 
Subpart E of 2 CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are 
requesting and provide the applicable supporting information. Below are the most 
commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 
Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 
Eligibility: Any applicant 
Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 


Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 
Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA. 
Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an 
Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. 
Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award 
subject to audit and finalization. See 
USAID’s Indirect 
Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit 
Organizations 
for further guidance. 


Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 
Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA 
Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, 
this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such 
time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal 
entity may apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it 
charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 


Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 
Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval 
is at the discretion of the AO. 


Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 


● 
Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates 
for the current year. 
● 
Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, 
personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than 
one program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year 
pg. 
34 



72011423RFA00001 


● 
Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across 
all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost 
to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 
If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 


9) 
Cost Sharing 
– If the cost-share is proposed, the 
applicant should estimate the amount of 
cost-sharing resources to be provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of 
such resources, and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also 
provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions), if any, of all 
organizations involved in implementing the resulting award. 
e) PriorApprovals in Accordance With 2 CFR 200.407 
Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 


f)Approval of Subawards 
The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 


● 
Name of organization 
● 
Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) 
● 
Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● 
Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● 
Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● 
Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● 
Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● 
Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 
pg. 
35 



72011423RFA00001 


g) UEI and SAM Requirements 
USAID 
may not 
award to an applicant unless the applicant 
has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (UEI) (formerly the DUNS number) and System for Award Management 
(SAM) requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding 
agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception 
approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 


1. 
Provide a valid DUNS and UEI number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. 
Be registered in SAM 
before 
submitting its application. 
SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. 
Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not 
qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another 
applicant. 


Note: The federal government is changing the unique identifier used for entities from the DUNS 
Number to the UEI generated by SAM.gov. On April 4, 2022, the DUNS Number will be 
removed from U.S. Government systems and the UEI will be the authoritative identifier. Include 
your DUNS Number and UEI on application documents until April 4; starting on April 4, 2022, 
you will use only the UEI. 


UEI and SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 


Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM on the Federal Service 
Desk website by clicking on “Help on UEI Transition.” Applicants must confirm whether they 
have an active SAM registration and UEI as part of the Initial Application. Also, applicants can 
review a Quick Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on 
www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to International 
Registrants. 


h) History of Performance 
In this section the applicant (including all partners of a joint venture) must provide information 
regarding its recent history of performance for all of its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or 
cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, not to exceed seven (7) awards 
during the last five (5) years, using the attached Past Performance Information (PPI) form (Annex 
2). The Applicant should provide information about a combined total of up to seven awards for 
itself and each major sub-applicant (defined as a sub-applicant whose proposed cost exceeds 10% 
of the applicant’s total proposed cost) in accordance with the following: 


pg. 
36 



72011423RFA00001 


• Name of the Awarding Organization; 
•Award Number; 
•Activity Title; 
•A brief description of the activity including scope of work or complexity/diversity of tasks; 
• Period of Performance; 
•Award Amount; 
• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last 3 years; and 
• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 
PPI must be submitted as an Annex to the Business (Cost) Application. 


USAID recommends that applicants alert the contacts that their names have been submitted and 
that they are authorized to provide performance information concerning the listed contracts if and 
when USAID requests it. 


If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a 
pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 


Past Performance is not an evaluation factor under this solicitation; however, PPI will be reviewed 
as part of a Pre-Award Risk Assessment of the apparently successful Applicant. 


I. Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 
The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award. 


I.1 
Branding Strategy Pre-Award Term 
a.Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it is 
promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 
b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
pg. 
37 



72011423RFA00001 


d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1)All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, 
stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 
(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 
(i) 
USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as 
found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI 
of the RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) 
It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(iv)If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 


(v) 
USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of 
an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 
(i) 
Describe the main program message. 
(ii) 
Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii)Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 
forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is 
from the American People.” 
pg. 
38 



72011423RFA00001 


(iv)Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 


(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, including 
any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 
(6)Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if 
they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 
e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 
f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 
I.2 
Marking Plan Pre-Award Term 
a.Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that 
will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with 
the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the 
Agency and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the 
RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, 
seal, or tagline. 
b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
(1)A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 
(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 
pg. 
39 



72011423RFA00001 


(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, 
media, or communications products funded by USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID 
Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge 
USAID and the support of the American people. 
(2)A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 
(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and 
where the applicant will place the marking; 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 
(3)Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of 
why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking 
requirements would: 
(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 
goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must 
explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each particular 
item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or product. 
(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 
or commodity would impair its functionality. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
pg. 
40 



72011423RFA00001 


(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 
must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or 
otherwise be inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 
f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the 
above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, 
the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 
g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 
J. 
Funding Restrictions 
Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 


Construction will not be authorized under this award. 


USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 


Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 


K. 
Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 
a. Personal Conflict of Interest 
1.An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. 
The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal 
considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and 
duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. Should 
the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the 
application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) 
calendar days following discovery. 
pg. 
41 



72011423RFA00001 


b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 
The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware 
of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this 
financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to 
non-public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding 
opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the applicant. 


END OF SECTION D 


pg. 
42 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 


1. 
CRITERIA 
The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 


The Technical Application will be evaluated by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria 
described in this section. 


2. 
REVIEWAND SELECTION PROCESS 
The application should represent the applicant’s best ideas and efforts, and clearly respond to the 
subject Program Description. USAID reserves right, but is not under obligation, to enter into 
discussions with one or more applicants in order to obtain clarifications, additional details, or to 
suggest refinements in the proposed technical approach, budget, or other aspects of application, if 
doing so is determined to be in the best interest of the U.S. Government. 


Applicants must note that these factors serve as the standard against which all technical 
information will be evaluated and serve to identify the significant matters which applications must 
address. Technical Approach, Management Approach and Staffing, Organizational Capacity of 
University (Partner or Prime) in that order of importance stated below, as described herein and 
prescribed by the Technical Application format. 


As part of the merit review process, all applicants will give an oral presentation. The details about 
oral presentation are provided in Section D. Technical Application Format. 


Applications will be reviewed by USAID direct hire and personal service contractors. The 
decision to issue an award vest with the Agreement Officer. 


3. 
MERIT REVIEW 
USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the criteria shown 
below. 


The SC will evaluate the various components of the application set forth below in the stated order 
of importance. 


1. Technical Approach (Most Important) 
2. Management Approach and Staffing (Second Most Important) 
3. Organizational Capacity of University (Partner or Prime) (Third Most Important). 
pg. 
43 



72011423RFA00001 


The result of the SC’s evaluation, using the Merit Review Criterion above will be used to 
determine the apparently successful applicant(s). A final risk assessment, including a review of 
cost and performance history, will then determine the final award(s) decisions. 


Evaluation Criterion No. 1, Technical Approach (Most important): 


There are no sub-criteria listed under this criterion: 


The Technical Approach will be evaluated in terms of overall quality, responsiveness to the 
program description, and appropriateness for the Georgian context. Evaluation of this criterion 
will be based on both the written application and the oral presentation.This includes: 


a. 
The innovativeness, creativity, realism, sustainability, and scalability of the 
technical approach, and the extent to which it is tailored to the Georgian education 
system. 
b. 
The extent to which the proposed technical approach and activities respond to the 
identified challenges in the program description; effectively support private sector 
engagement and establishment of strong private sector partnerships; incorporate 
technological solutions and platforms; build local capacity and ownership; and 
include realistic steps towards ensuring sustainability of interventions after the 
end of the program. 
c. 
The extent to which the proposed Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) 
approach and proposed indicators are likely to accurately measure the 
achievement of results, set high yet realistic targets, can be used for timely 
management decisions, and can credibly measure the actual performance of the 
activity. 
Evaluation Criterion No.2, Management Approach and Staffing (Second most important): 


There are no sub-criteria listed under this criterion: 


The Management Approach and Staffing Section will be evaluated for its quality, clarity and 
realism. This includes the following considerations: 


a. 
The extent to which the activity management structure is clear and consistent with 
the technical approach, including the extent to which the proposed organizational 
structure, roles of the team, staffing and partnerships maximize flexibility and 
adaptive management. 
b. 
The extent to which Key Personnel meet the minimum qualifications and have 
relevant and demonstrated qualifications, experience, past performance and skills 
applicable to the roles/positions being proposed. 
Evaluation Criterion No. 3, Organizational Capacity of University (Partner or Prime) 
(Third most important): 


There are no sub-criteria listed under this criterion: 


Under the Organizational Capacity of University Criterion, the applicant’s application will 
be evaluated based on the following areas: 


pg. 
44 



72011423RFA00001 


a. 
Quality and relevance of the University’s teacher education programs, including programs 
that address delivering inclusive education, innovative teaching methodologies, education 
leadership and technology-based courses. Demonstrated availability 
of human resources, 
including both administrative and academic personnel, to work closely and intensively 
with 
local Georgian universities. 
b. 
Realism of the approach to the sustainability of partnerships with Georgian 
universities and proposed measures for how to retain the impact of the 
interventions after the lifetime of the project. 
If the applicant is a university and intends to do the work that is expected of a university partner, 
this section should address the applicant’s own capacity. 


4. 
BUSINESS REVIEW 
The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 


The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 


Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 


The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a 
pre-award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 


END OF SECTION E 


pg. 
45 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION F: FEDERALAWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 


1. 
Federal Award Notices 
Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 


2. 
Administrative & National Policy Requirements 
USAID/Caucasus will be responsible for the negotiation and obligation, and subsequent 
management and administration, of award which develop from successful application. The 
USAID Caucasus Regional Agreement Officer will be responsible for conducting negotiations, 
making the awards, and obligating costs to the recommended partner(s). He/she will only do so 
after making a positive risk assessment or responsibility determination that the applicant 
possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management competence in planning and 
carrying out assistance programs and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of 
accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. The Agreement Officer will also 
designate an Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) to assist in the technical management and 
oversight of the award. 


The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 


For US organizations: 
ADS 303, 
2 CFR 700, 
2 CFR 200, 
and 
Standard Provisions for U.S. 
Non-governmental organizations. 


For Non US organizations: 
Standard Provisions for 
Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 


For Public International Organizations: Chapter 308 of USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS), including the Standard Provisions set forth in ADS 308.3.14. ADS Chapter 308: 
http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/308. 


Please see USAID’s ADS Sections 303.4 and 303.5. The actual Standard Provisions included in 
the award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 


See Annex 2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 


Authority to Obligate the Government: The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may 


pg. 
46 



72011423RFA00001 


legally commit the Government to the expenditures of public funds. No costs chargeable to the 
proposed Cooperative Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Cooperative Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 


3. 
Reporting Requirements 
3.1 
Financial Reporting: 
Financial Reports must be submitted in accordance with 2 CFR 200.327 for U.S. organizations, 
and for Non-U.S. organizations financial reports will be required at a frequency depending on 
method of payment, but at least quarterly. Reporting requirements, such as the format, number of 
copies, information to be included, due dates and distribution will be finalized in consultation 
with the Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) after the issuance of the award. 


(1) The recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a quarterly basis via 
electronic format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov). The recipient must submit a copy of the FFR at the same time to the 
Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and to the Agreement Officer. 
The recipient must submit quarterly financial reports no later than 30 calendar days after the end 
of each reporting period. The following reporting period end dates shall be used for interim 
reports: 3/31, 6/30, 9/30, or 12/31. 
(2) The recipient must submit the original and two copies of all final financial reports to 
USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMPLOC Unit, the AOR and to the Agreement Officer. The 
recipient must submit an electronic version of the final Federal Financial Form (SF-425) to U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services in accordance with paragraph (1) above. 
The recipient must submit the final financial report no later than 90 calendar days from the end of 
the agreement. 


3.2 
Performance Reporting 
The 
Recipient 
must 
submit 
reports 
totheUSAIDAgreement 
Officer 
andAgreement 
Officer’s 
Representative 
(AOR) 
as 
described 
below. 


3.2.1 
AnnualWorkPlans 
The 
recipient 
must 
work 
with 
USAID 
to 
develop 
and 
submit 
an 
annual 
work 
plan 
within 
45calendar 
days 
of 
the 
effective 
date 
of 
the 
award 
and 
should 
cover 
the 
time 
from 
the 
date 
of 
the 
award 
through 
the 
end 
of 
the 
fourth 
quarter 
of 
the 
US 
Government 
(USG) 
Fiscal 
Year 
(September 
30). 
The 
Agreement 
Officer’s 
Representative 
(AOR) 
will 
review 
and 
approve 
the 
plan 
within 
15calendar 
days 
after 
receipt 
of 
the 
draft 
work 
plan. 
Subsequent 
annual 
work 
plans 
will 
be 
due 
to 
USAID 
60 
days 
prior 
to 
the 
start 
of 
the 
first 
quarter 
of 
the 
USG 
Fiscal 
Year 
unless 
an 
alternative 
schedule 
is 
agreed 
to 
by 
both 
USAID 
and 
the 
recipient. 


pg. 
47 



72011423RFA00001 


Annual 
work 
plans 
are 
developed 
annually 
and 
include 
activities 
for 
the 
given 
year, 
time 
frame 
for 
implementation 
of 
annual 
activities, 
budget, 
and 
proposed 
outreach 
and 
communication 
deliverables 
including 
strategic 
communication 
activities. 


The 
annual 
work 
plan 
will 
describe 
activities 
to 
be 
conducted 
at 
a 
greater 
level 
of 
detail 
than 
the 
Program 
Description 
of 
the 
award, 
but 
should 
be 
cross-referenced 
with 
the 
applicable 
sections 
in 
the 
Program 
Description. 
All 
activities 
must 
be 
within 
the 
scope 
and 
objectives 
of 
the 
award. 
Annual 
work 
plans 
must 
not 
change 
such 
scope 
and 
objectives 
or 
any 
other 
terms 
and 
conditions 
of 
the 
award 
in 
any 
way; 
such 
changes 
may 
only 
beapproved 
by 
the 
Agreement 
Officer, 
in 
advance 
and 
in 
writing. 
Thereafter, 
if 
there 
are 
inconsistencies 
between 
the 
work 
plan 
and 
Program 
Description 
or 
other 
terms 
and 
conditions 
of 
the 
award, 
the 
latter 
will 
take 
precedence 
over 
the 
workplan. 


Therefore,thework 
plansmust 
include, 
at 
a 
minimum: 


● 
A 
strategic 
statement, 
articulating 
major 
program 
impacts 
over 
the 
life 
of 
the 
program, 
including 
information 
on 
how 
proposed 
interventions 
will 
be 
implemented 
● 
Astrategic 
statement 
of 
challenges 
to 
be 
addressed 
in 
particular 
years, 
and 
opportunities. 
● 
All 
proposed 
interventions, 
including 
expected 
accomplishments 
and 
progress 
towards 
achieving 
results 
and 
performance 
measures 
tied 
to 
the 
indicators 
agreed 
upon 
within 
the 
MEL 
Plan 
● 
Personnel 
requirements 
and 
consultancy 
needs 
during 
program 
implementation 
● 
Details 
of 
collaborationwith 
other 
major 
partners 
● 
Major 
commodities 
to 
be 
procured 
(as 
applicable) 
As 
part 
of 
the 
CLA 
process, 
the 
Recipient 
must 
reviewtheYear 
OneImplementation 
Plan 
six 
months 
after 
the 
award 
date. 
The 
Recipient 
must 
inform 
the 
AOR 
if 
any 
revisions 
are 
required 
or 
appropriate 
toachieve 
the 
work 
plan 
by 
the 
end 
ofYear 
One. 


All 
work 
plans, 
including 
significantrevisions 
thereto, 
must 
be 
approved 
by 
theAOR. 


3.2.2 
ActivityMonitoring,EvaluationandLearning(AMEL)Plan 
Monitoring, 
evaluation 
and 
learning 
(MEL) 
will 
be 
an 
on-going, 
collaborative 
process 
led 
by 
the 
Recipient, 
with 
the 
participation 
of 
USAID 
and 
key 
stakeholders. 
The 
Recipient 
will 
submit 
a 
MEL 
Plan, 
along 
with 
the 
initial 
work 
plan, 
to 
theAOR 
for 
review 
and 
approval 
within 
60 
days 
of 
award. 


Core 
Content 


The 
MEL 
Plan 
must 
include 
the 
following 
core 
content: 
visual 
depiction 
of 
the 
activity 
logic 
model 
that 
directly 
connects 
to 
USAID/Georgia 
Development 
Objective; 
a 
narrative 
description 
of 
the 
logic 
model 
that 
explains 
how 
the 
activity 
advances 
USAID/Georgia 
strategic 
priorities; 
a 
set 
of 
quantitative 
and/or 
qualitative 
performance 
indicators 
that 
measure 
the 
goal/objective, 
intermediate 
outcomes 
and 
outputs 
of 
the 
logic 
model; 
context 
measures, 
as 
appropriate; 
a 
data 
collection, 
management 
and 
analysis 
plan 
(e.g. 
gender 
gaps); 
internal 
data 
quality 
assessment 
procedures; 
an 
internal 
and 
external 
evaluation 
plan; 
a 
learning 
plan 
that 
describes 
how 
monitoring 
data, 
assessments, 
evaluations, 
and 
pause-and-reflect 
sessions 
will 
be 
used 
for 
adaptive 
management; 
an 
annual 
schedule 
of 
key 
MEL 
activities 
(e.g. 
surveys, 
assessments, 
internal 
Data 
Quality 
Assessments, 
[quarterly/semi-annual/or 
annual] 
reporting 
to 
USAID, 
annual 
data 
entry 
into 
USAID’sDevelopment 
Information 
Solution 
(DIS) 
system, 
semi-annualreporting 
of 
location 
and 
other 
geographic-based 
data 


pg. 
48 



72011423RFA00001 


to 
USAID, 
MEL 
plan 
updates, 
etc.); 
and 
the 
staffing 
structure 
and 
budget 
allocation 
to 
complete 
all 
MELtasks. 


Performance 
Indicators 


In 
addition 
to 
indicators 
that 
measure 
the 
logic 
model, 
theMEL 
Plan 
will 
include 
allstandard 
foreign 
assistance 
(F) 
indicators 
and 
USAID/Georgia 
Performance 
Management 
Plan 
(PMP) 
indicators 
assigned 
by 
the 
AOR. 
For 
each 
indicator, 
the 
MEL 
Plan 
must 
include 
a 
Performance 
Indicator 
Reference 
Sheet 
(PIRS) 
which 
provides 
a 
precise 
definition, 
information 
on 
disaggregation, 
the 
data 
source, 
frequency 
of 
data 
collection, 
collection 
method, 
the 
party 
responsible 
for 
data 
collection, 
when 
baseline 
information 
will 
be 
collected, 
and 
expected 
annual 
targets. 
All 
person-level 
data 
must 
be 
disaggregated 
by 
sex. 
The 
MEL 
Plan 
will 
also 
include 
a 
Performance 
Indicator 
Tracking 
Table 
(PITT), 
an 
excel-based 
file 
that 
tracks 
all 
quantitative 
performance 
data 
and 
lists 
baseline 
figures, 
quarterly 
and/or 
annual 
targets, 
quarterly 
and/or 
annual 
actuals, 
and 
life 
of 
award 
targets, 
disaggregated 
as 
appropriate. 


The 
MEL 
Plan 
must 
consider 
indicator 
disaggregation 
by 
geographic 
location. 
When 
geographically 
disaggregated 
indicators 
are 
included, 
the 
MEL 
Plan 
must 
indicate 
the 
level 
of 
geographic 
detail 
at 
which 
the 
indicator 
data 
will 
be 
collected. 
Additionally, 
geographic 
indicator 
data 
must 
be 
collected 
and 
submitted 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
geographic 
data 
collection 
and 
submissions 
standards 
outlined 
inSection 
3.5Geographic 
Information 
System 
(GIS) 
Reporting 
below. 


Reporting 


The 
Recipient 
will 
include 
performance 
data 
as 
part 
of 
quarterly 
and 
annual 
reports, 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
reporting 
frequency 
of 
each 
indicator 
as 
defined 
in 
the 
PIRS 
and 
presented 
in 
the 
PITT. 
The 
PITT 
shall 
present 
measurable 
progress, 
or 
lack 
thereof, 
toward 
the 
award 
objectives. 
In 
particular, 
annual 
reporting 
on 
F 
indicators 
(actual 
results 
and 
updated 
targets, 
along 
with 
justifications 
and 
deviation 
narratives) 
must 
be 
provided 
no 
later 
than 
30 
days 
after 
the 
end 
of 
the 
[annual 
reporting 
period/fiscal 
year], 
i.e. 
September 
30. 
All 
annual 
data 
must 
be 
submitted 
in 
the 
format 
requested 
by 
the 
AOR, 
e.g. 
standard 
data 
collection 
templates 
for 
F 
indicators 
in 
the 
Performance 
Plan 
and 
Report 
(PPR), 
data 
entry 
directly 
into 
the 
USAID’s 
DIS, 
etc. 
Appropriate 
training 
will 
be 
provided 
by 
USAID 
to 
support 
and 
ensure 
compliance. 


ExternalEvaluation 


USAID 
or 
its 
designee 
may 
conduct 
independent 
mid-term 
and/or 
final 
evaluations 
of 
the 
activity. 
If 
such 
an 
evaluation 
is 
conducted, 
the 
Recipient 
will 
make 
all 
its 
records 
and 
data 
available 
to 
the 
independent 
evaluation 
team. 


Updates 


The 
MEL 
Plan 
must 
be 
updated 
annually 
in 
collaboration 
with 
USAID 
to 
reflect 
all 
relevant 
changes, 


e.g. 
new 
F 
and 
USAID 
and 
the 
Activity 
PMP 
indicator 
assignments, 
revised 
targets, 
updates 
to 
the 
logic 
model, 
work 
plan 
updates, 
etc. 
In 
the 
event 
that 
USAID 
redesigns 
the 
standard 
F 
indicators, 
e.g. 
adds 
new 
required 
indicators, 
retires 
or 
replaces 
the 
existing 
indicators, 
etc., 
the 
Recipientmust 
revise 
its 
MEL 
plan 
accordingly. 
The 
revised 
MEL 
Plan 
will 
be 
presented 
for 
review 
and 
approval 
along 
with 
the 
annual 
work 
plan 
throughout 
the 
life 
of 
the 
award. 
pg. 
49 



72011423RFA00001 


3.2.3 
QuarterlyPerformanceReports 
The 
Recipient 
shall 
submit 
a 
quarterly 
performance 
report 
within 
30 
days 
after 
each 
quarter 
of 
the 
USG 
Fiscal 
Year. 
The 
quarterly 
performance 
report 
will 
document 
overall 
progress 
towards 
the 
sub-purposes 
of 
the 
project, 
activities 
completed 
during 
the 
reporting 
period, 
any 
problems 
and 
challenges 
encountered 
during 
implementation 
(including 
financial 
issues) 
and 
how 
they 
were 
mitigated, 
data 
on 
all 
indicators 
established 
in 
the 
MEL 
Plan, 
and 
specific 
activities 
planned 
for 
the 
next 
quarterly 
reporting 
period. 
The 
format 
of 
the 
progress 
reports 
will 
be 
determined 
in 
consultation 
with 
theAOR. 


3.2.4 
AnnualReports 
The 
Annual 
Progress 
Report 
is 
due 
45 
calendar 
days 
after 
the 
end 
of 
the 
reporting 
period 
covering 
activities 
of 
the 
previous 
USG 
fiscal 
year. 
A 
fourth 
quarter 
Performance 
Report 
is 
not 
required; 
the 
Recipient 
may 
include 
results 
from 
the 
fourth 
quarter 
within 
theAnnual 
Progress 
Report. 


The 
report 
will 
provide 
a 
succinct 
presentation 
of 
achievements 
of 
activity 
objectives 
and 
targets 
during 
the 
year 
with 
supporting 
discussion 
to 
explain 
any 
shortfalls. 
The 
report 
will 
summarize 
programprogress, 
provide 
an 
analysis 
of 
program 
impactbased 
on 
activities 
completed 
or 
in-progress, 
identify 
success 
stories, 
and 
suggest 
resolution 
of 
any 
outstanding 
issues. 
The 
Annual 
Progress 
Report 
will 
provide 
a 
summary 
of 
activities, 
accomplishments 
and 
lessons 
learned 
regarding 
gender 
equality 
and 
social 
inclusion 
efforts 
and 
efforts 
to 
coordinate 
with 
other 
USAID 
activities 
and 
collaborate 
with 
private 
sector 
stakeholders. 
The 
Annual 
Progress 
Reports 
will 
include 
a 
performance-indicator 
data 
table 
presenting 
the 
baseline, 
targets 
established 
for 
each 
fiscal 
year, 
and 
the 
actual 
annual 
performance 
data 
using 
indicators 
from 
the 
MELPlan. 
The 
fourth 
quarterly 
report 
serves 
astheannual 
reportto 
USAID 
–thus, 
it 
is 
more 
extensive 
and 
contains 
more 
information 
than 
a 
quarterly 
report.Annual 
Reports 
should 
reflect 
the 
structure 
ofthe 
annual 
work 
plan.Annual 
is 
defined 
according 
to 
the 
U.S. 
Government’s 
FiscalYear: 
October 
1st 
to 
September 
30th. 
TheAnnual 
Report 
must 
be 
submitted 
to 
the 
USAID 
by 
October 
31 
of 
each 
year. 
In 
addition 
to 
the 
requirements 
of 
the 
Quarterly 
Report, 
theAnnualReport 
mustalso: 


● 
Describe 
overall 
performance 
against 
targets 
andgoals 
during 
the 
fiscal 
year, 
and 
why 
targets 
and 
goals 
were 
not 
achieved 
or 
why 
they 
were 
exceeded. 
Discuss 
problems 
and 
challenges 
and 
how 
they 
may 
affect 
out-year 
planning. 
● 
Provide 
atable 
displaying 
the 
indicators 
the 
Recipientis 
responsible 
for 
reporting 
on 
and 
the 
indicatorvalues 
for 
the 
year, 
alongwith 
prior 
year 
values 
and 
future 
year 
targets. 
It 
should 
also 
include 
explanations 
for 
any 
indicator 
values 
falling 
above 
or 
below 
target. 
● 
Provide 
illustrative 
activities 
to 
demonstrate 
whether 
the 
overallgoals 
of 
the 
project 
are 
being 
achieved. 
● 
Identify 
prospects 
for 
achieving 
longer 
term 
impact 
where 
applicable. 
3.2.5. 
Final Report: 
The recipient shall prepare a final report on the award in lieu of the final quarterly performance 
report. The final report must be submitted no later than 90 days after the end of the award. 
The final report will clearly describe major accomplishments and results achieved attributable to 
activities under this award, an account of the sustainability of these efforts and/or results, final 
data for indicators in the performance management plan, an account of any problems encountered 


pg. 
50 



72011423RFA00001 


during implementation (including financial issues), and lessons learned and/or best practices 
identified during implementation. 


The final report must be submitted to the Agreement Officer’s Representative, to the Agreement 
Officer, and to USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) electronically at: 


https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/submit.aspx 


3.2.6. 
Close-out Plans: 
Six (6) months prior to the completion of activities and/or the award end date, the recipient must 
submit a close-out plan for the award. The plan must include a) draft property disposition plan, b) 
plan for the phase-out of in-country operations, c) delivery schedule for all reports or other 
deliverables required under the agreement, and d) timetable for completing all required actions in 
the demobilization plan, including the submission date of the final property disposition plan to the 
Agreement Officer. 


3.3 Gender Reporting 
As part of its regular reports, the recipient must collect, analyze and submit sex disaggregated 
data and propose actions that will address any gender-related challenges that might arise from that 
data. The recipient will report any challenges to the AOR who, in turn, will work with the USAID 
Mission’s gender specialist to find reasonable solutions. 


3.4 Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements 
a) Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 
1) The recipient must provide the Agreement Officer’s Representative one copy of any 
Intellectual Work that is published, and a list of any Intellectual Work that is not published. 
2) In addition, the recipient must submit Intellectual Work, whether published or not, to the DEC 
on-line. The recipient must review the DEC Web site for submission instructions, including 
document formatting and the types of documents to submit. Submission instructions can be found 
at: 
http://dec.usaid.gov 
. 
3) For purposes of submissions to the DEC, Intellectual Work includes all works that document 
the implementation, evaluation, and results of international development assistance activities 
developed or acquired under this award, which may include program and communications 
materials, evaluations and assessments, information products, research and technical reports, 
progress and performance reports required under this award (excluding administrative financial 
information), and other reports, articles and papers prepared by the recipient under the award, 
whether published or not. The term does not include the recipient’s information that is incidental 
to award administration, such as financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management 
information. 
4) Each document submitted should contain essential bibliographic information, such as (1) 
descriptive title; (2) author(s) name; (3) award number; (4) sponsoring USAID office; (5) 
pg. 
51 



72011423RFA00001 


development objective; and (6) date of publication. 


5) The recipient must not submit to the DEC any financially sensitive information or personally 
identifiable information, such as social security numbers, home addresses and dates of birth. Such 
information must be removed prior to submission. The recipient must not submit classified 
documents to the DEC. 
b. In the event award funds are used to underwrite the cost of publishing, in lieu of the publisher 
assuming this cost as is the normal practice, any profits or royalties up to the amount of such cost 
must be credited to the award unless the schedule of the award has identified the profits or 
royalties as program income. 
3.5. 
Geographic Information System (GIS) Reporting 
1. Implementation Location Data: 
The recipient must 
provide the AOR] and Mission GIS 
Specialist with Implementation Location Data semi-annually on April 15 and October 15. The 
data should include the exact location of implementation. For this purpose, the 
[contractor/recipient] must fill in the “Activity Location Data GIS Report Template.” This 
template will be provided by the USAID/Georgia Strategy and Program Office. 
2. Intended Beneficiary Location Data: 
The recipient 
must provide the AOR and Mission GIS 
Specialist with Intended Beneficiary Location Data semi-annually on April 15 and October 15. 
The data should include the location of intended beneficiaries at the municipality level (Admin 2). 
For this purpose, the recipient must fill in the “Activity Location Data GIS Report Template.” 
This template will be provided by the USAID/Georgia Strategy and Program Office. 
3. Investment Data: 
The recipient must provide the 
AOR and Mission GIS Specialist with 
Investment Data annually on October 15. The data should follow the estimation process provided 
and be calculated at the municipality level (Admin 2). For this purpose, the recipient must fill in 
the “Activity Location Data GIS Report Template.” This template will be provided by the 
USAID/Georgia Strategy and Program Office. 
4. Performance Indicators: 
The [contractor/recipient]must submit annually data for several Key 
Performance Indicators that measure the most significant outputs/deliverables of the activity by 
region, municipality, town or village. This data must be submitted no later than November 15 
each year and must reflect the results for the previous fiscal year, i.e the actual value of the 
indicator for previous fiscal year disaggregated by geographic location. The recipient must work 
closely with the AOR to review the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan to 
identify jointly Key Performance Indicators that reflect and convey the most important results 
achieved or to be achieved. USAID is interested in Performance Indicators that can be 
meaningfully disaggregated by geographic location. The number of these indicators will depend 
upon the complexity of the activity and could range in number approximately from 1 to 10. For 
this purpose, the [contractor/recipient] must fill in the “Performance Indicator GIS Report 
Template.” This template will be provided by the USAID/Georgia Strategy and Program Office. 
5. Geographic Data: 
If created or acquired under 
this award, the recipient must provide annually 
on October 15 to the AOR and mission GIS Specialist any of the following types of Geographic 
Data: 
pg. 
52 



72011423RFA00001 


● 
thematic data such as social and economic statistics at municipality level, poverty data, 
demographic and health indicators, land use, land cover, hydrology, and transportation 
infrastructure; USAID prefers to receive this data in GIS standard formats, however 
standard database formats are also allowed (e.g. poverty data can be submitted as an 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet.); 
● 
activity specific geographic data such as theanalytical output of a geographic analysis 
that is conducted while implementing the activity and is useful to USAID’s development 
planning and project design purposes; or 
● 
any other geographic data, such as cartographic 
products (e.g. maps, geographic data 
visualizations), aerial and satellite imagery created or acquired under this award. 
Cartographic products 
submitted to USAID must be in 
industry standard Esri Map 
Document .mxd format and in high resolution .jpg or .pdf formats. All data contained in 
the .mxd must be submitted according to the Geographic Data standards outlined in next 
paragraph. 
Geographic Data submitted to USAID under this paragraph must be in industry standard formats 
such as Shapefile (.shp) or in a File Geodatabase and include metadata. Metadata is a summary 
document providing content, quality, type, creation, and spatial information about a data set. It 
represents who, what, when, where, why and how of the resource. Metadata can be stored in any 
format such as a text file, Extensible Markup Language (XML), or database record. Metadata 
records include core library catalog elements such as Title, Abstract, and Publication Data; 
geographic elements such as Geographic Extent and Projection Information; and database 
elements such as Attribute Label Definitions and Attribute Domain Values. Geographic Data 
must be projected to the Geographic Coordinate System World Geodetic System 1984 (GCS 
WGS 1984). All data must use the World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 1984) datum. 


3.6 
Program Income 
Program income, if any will be generated under the award, will be treated under the award in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.307 or, for non-U.S. organizations, see the standard provision 
“Program Income.” 


3.7 
Branding & Marking: 
It is a federal statutory and regulatory requirement (see Section 641, Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended, 2 CFR 700.16 and 22 CFR 226.91) that all USAID programs, projects, 
activities, public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under a 
USAID grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award or sub-award must be marked 
appropriately overseas with the USAID identity. In accordance with ADS 320.3.3 Branding and 
Marking Requirements for Assistance Awards USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, 
activities, public communications, or commodities implemented or delivered under co-funded 
instruments – such as grants, cooperative agreements, or other assistance awards that usually 
require a cost share – generally are “co-branded and co-marked.” 


The successful applicant will be required to submit a branding strategy and marking plan. The 
Applicant may request a presumptive exemption to marking requirements established in 22 CFR 


pg. 
53 



72011423RFA00001 


226.91 and 2 CFR 700.16. More information on Branding strategy and Marking plan are available 
at 
http://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/branding/assistance-awards 
. 
The branding strategy and marking plan will become a material element of the cooperative 
agreement. Information on USAID’s branding “assistance” applies to this RFA. ADS Chapter 320 
sections concerning “acquisition” do not apply to this RFA. ADS Chapter 320 can be found on 
USAID website: 
http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/320.pdf 
. 


3.8 
Environmental Compliance 
The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/ 
), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. Recipient environmental compliance obligations under these regulations 
and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this award. 


In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter will govern. 


No activity funded under this award will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 
Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 
(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 


2)An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) describing the successful activity's purpose, 
location, duration and intensity; considering alternatives; and assessing impacts, including 
cumulative impacts, in light of existing and proposed activities was prepared in accordance with 
USAID Environmental Procedures. The Request for Categorical Exclusion approved by the BEO 
is included into the NOFO as an attachment. The Environmental Compliance requirements will be 
developed based on this document. 
As part of its initial work plan, and all work plans thereafter, the Recipient, in collaboration with 
the AOR and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, 
must review all ongoing and planned activities under this Cooperative Agreement to determine if 
they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 


If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it must prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities may be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 


Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation must be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 


pg. 
54 



72011423RFA00001 


submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 


END OF SECTION F 


pg. 
55 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION G: FEDERALAWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 


1. 
NOFO Points of Contact 
See Section D, Paragraph 1. 


2. 
Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 
The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: 
https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman. 


The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: 
Ombudsman@usaid.gov 


END OF SECTION G 


pg. 
56 



72011423RFA00001 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 


USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 


Applications with Proprietary Data 


Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 


“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 


Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 


“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 


END OF SECTION H 


pg. 
57 



72011423RFA00001 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGETTEMPLATE 


The applicant is required to submit the SF-424A. In addition, the applicant must submit a detail 
and summary budget in Section D.2.d., according to the following suggested format: 


Budget Item 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Total 
USAID 
Cost 
Share (if 
proposed) 
Total Project 
Personnel (Salaries and 
Allowances) 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Fringe Benefits 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Travel and Transportation 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Procurement of Equipment 
and Supplies 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Contractual/Subagreements 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Other Direct Cost 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Total Direct Costs 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Indirect Costs 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
TOTAL PROJECT COST 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 


pg. 
58 



72011423RFA00001 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 


(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found 
at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 
and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The 
actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. 
The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 


Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 


REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 


Require 
d 
Not 
Required 
Standard 
Provision 
TBD 
RAA1. 
NEGOTIATED 
INDIRECT 
COST 
RATES 
-PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
RAA2. 
NEGOTIATED 
INDIRECT 
COST 
RATES 
-PROVISIONAL(Nonprofit) 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
RAA3. 
NEGOTIATED 
INDIRECT 
COST 
RATE 
-PROVISIONAL(Profit) 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
RAA4. 
INDIRECT 
COSTS 
– 
DE 
MINIMIS 
RATE 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
X 
RAA5. 
EXCHANGE 
VISITORSAND 
PARTICIPANTTRAINING 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA6. 
VOLUNTARYPOPULATION 
PLANNINGACTIVITIES 
– 
SUPPLEMENTALREQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY2009) 
RAA7. 
PROTECTION 
OF 
THE 
INDIVIDUALASARESEARCH 
SUBJECT 
(APRIL1998) 
RAA8. 
CARE 
OF 
LABORATORYANIMALS 
(MARCH 
2004) 
X 
RAA9. 
TITLE 
TOAND 
CARE 
OF 
PROPERTY(COOPERATING 
COUNTRY 
TITLE) 
(NOVEMBER 
1985) 
TBD 
RAA10. 
COST 
SHARING 
(MATCHING) 
(FEBRUARY2012) 
RAA11. 
PROHIBITION 
OFASSISTANCE 
TO 
DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS 
(JUNE 
1999) 
RAA12. 
INVESTMENT 
PROMOTION 
(NOVEMBER 
2003) 
X 
RAA13. 
REPORTING 
HOST 
GOVERNMENTTAXES 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
X 
RAA14. 
FOREIGN 
GOVERNMENT 
DELEGATIONS 
TO 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES 
(JUNE 
2012) 
X 
RAA15. 
CONSCIENCE 
CLAUSE 
IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY2012) 
RAA16. 
CONDOMS 
(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 
2014) 
RAA17. 
PROHIBITION 
ON 
THE 
PROMOTION 
ORADVOCACYOF 
THE 
LEGALIZATION 
OR 
PRACTICE 
OF 
PROSTITUTION 
OR 
SEX 
TRAFFICKING 
(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 
2014) 
X 
RAA18. 
USAID 
DISABILITYPOLICY-ASSISTANCE 
(DECEMBER 
2004) 


pg. 
59 



72011423RFA00001 


RAA19. 
STANDARDS 
FORACCESSIBILITYFOR 
THE 
DISABLED 
IN 
USAIDASSISTANCEAWARDS 
INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 
2004) 
RAA20. 
STATEMENT 
FOR 
IMPLEMENTERS 
OFANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES 
ON 
LACK 
OF 
SUPPORT 
FOR 
PROSTITUTION 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA21. 
ELIGIBILITYOF 
SUBRECIPIENTS 
OFANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA22. 
PROHIBITION 
ON 
THE 
USE 
OFANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS 
TO 
PROMOTE, 
SUPPORT, 
ORADVOCATE 
FOR 
THE 
LEGALIZATION 
OR 
PRACTICE 
OF 
PROSTITUTION 
(JUNE 
2012) 
X 
RAA23. 
UNIVERSALIDENTIFIERAND 
SYSTEM 
FORAWARD 
MANAGEMENT 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
X 
RAA24. 
REPORTING 
SUBAWARDSAND 
EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
RAA25. 
PATENT 
REPORTING 
PROCEDURES 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
RAA26.ACCESS 
TO 
USAID 
FACILITIESAND 
USAID’S 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 
(AUGUST 
2013) 
X 
RAA27. 
CONTRACT 
PROVISION 
FOR 
DBAINSURANCE 
UNDER 
RECIPIENT 
PROCUREMENTS 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
X 
RAA28.AWARD 
TERMAND 
CONDITION 
FOR 
RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY 
AND 
PERFORMANCE 
MATTERS 
(April 
2016) 
RAA29. 
RESERVED 
X 
RAA30. 
PROGRAM 
INCOME 
(AUGUST 
2020) 
X 
RAA31. 
NEVER 
CONTRACTWITH 
THE 
ENEMY(NOVEMBER 
2020) 


REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 


Require 
d 
Not 
Required 
Standard 
Provision 
TBD 
RAA1.ADVANCE 
PAYMENTAND 
REFUNDS 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
RAA2. 
REIMBURSEMENT 
PAYMENTAND 
REFUNDS 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
TBD 
RAA3. 
INDIRECT 
COSTS 
– 
NEGOTIATED 
INDIRECT 
COST 
RATE 
AGREEMENT 
(NICRA) 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
RAA4. 
INDIRECT 
COSTS 
– 
CHARGEDASAFIXEDAMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA5. 
INDIRECT 
COSTS 
– 
DE 
MINIMIS 
RATE 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
X 
RAA6. 
UNIVERSALIDENTIFIERAND 
SYSTEM 
OFAWARD 
MANAGEMENT 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
X 
RAA7. 
REPORTING 
SUBAWARDSAND 
EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 
2020) 
X 
RAA8. 
SUBAWARDS 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
X 
RAA9. 
TRAVELAND 
INTERNATIONALAIR 
TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
RAA10. 
OCEAN 
SHIPMENT 
OF 
GOODS 
(JUNE 
2012) 
X 
RAA11. 
REPORTING 
HOST 
GOVERNMENTTAXES 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA12. 
PATENT 
RIGHTS 
(JUNE 
2012) 
X 
RAA13. 
EXCHANGE 
VISITORSAND 
PARTICIPANTTRAINING 
(JUNE 
2012) 


pg. 
60 



72011423RFA00001 


RAA14. 
INVESTMENT 
PROMOTION 
(NOVEMBER 
2003) 
TBD 
RAA15. 
COST 
SHARE 
(JUNE 
2012) 
X 
RAA16. 
PROGRAM 
INCOME 
(AUGUST 
2020) 
RAA17. 
FOREIGN 
GOVERNMENT 
DELEGATIONS 
TO 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA18. 
STANDARDS 
FORACCESSIBILITYFOR 
THE 
DISABLED 
IN 
USAIDASSISTANCEAWARDS 
INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 
2004) 
RAA19. 
PROTECTION 
OF 
HUMAN 
RESEARCH 
SUBJECTS 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA20. 
STATEMENT 
FOR 
IMPLEMENTERS 
OFANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES 
ON 
LACK 
OF 
SUPPORT 
FOR 
PROSTITUTION 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA21. 
ELIGIBILITYOF 
SUBRECIPIENTS 
OFANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA22. 
PROHIBITION 
ON 
THE 
USE 
OFANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS 
TO 
PROMOTE, 
SUPPORT, 
ORADVOCATE 
FOR 
THE 
LEGALIZATION 
OR 
PRACTICE 
OF 
PROSTITUTION 
(JUNE 
2012) 
RAA23. 
VOLUNTARYPOPULATION 
PLANNINGACTIVITIES 
– 
SUPPLEMENTALREQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY2009) 
X 
RAA24. 
CONSCIENCE 
CLAUSE 
IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY2012) 
RAA25. 
CONDOMS 
(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 
2014) 
RAA26. 
PROHIBITION 
ON 
THE 
PROMOTION 
ORADVOCACYOF 
THE 
LEGALIZATION 
OR 
PRACTICE 
OF 
PROSTITUTION 
OR 
SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 
2014) 
RAA27. 
LIMITATION 
ON 
SUBAWARDS 
TO 
NON-LOCALENTITIES 
(JULY 
2014) 
X 
RAA28. 
CONTRACT 
PROVISION 
FOR 
DBAINSURANCE 
UNDER 
RECIPIENT 
PROCUREMENTS 
(DECEMBER 
2014) 
X 
RAA29. 
CONTRACTAWARD 
TERMAND 
CONDITION 
FOR 
RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITYAND 
PERFORMANCE 
MATTERS 
(April 
2016) 
RAA30. 
RESERVED 
X 
RAA31. 
NEVER 
CONTRACTWITH 
THE 
ENEMY(NOVEMBER 
2020) 


pg. 
61 



72011423RFA00001 


ANNEX 3 – PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (PPI) 


(TO 
BE 
COMPLETED 
BY 
THE 
APPLICANT) 


1. 
AWARD 
NUMBER: 
2. 
CONTRACTOR/RECIPIENT 
(NAME 
AND 
ADDRESS): 
3. 
TYPE 
OF 
AWARD: 
4. 
COMPLEXITY 
OF 
WORK: DIFFICULT 
ROUTINE 
5. 
DESCRIPTION, 
LOCATION, 
AND 
RELEVANCY 
OF 
WORK: 
6. 
DOLLAR 
VALUE 
OF 
WORK 
: 
STATUS: ACTIVE 
COMPLETED 
7. 
DATE 
OF 
AWARD: 
AWARD 
COMPLETION 
DATE 
(INCLUDING 
EXTENSIONS): 
_____ 
8. 
TYPE 
AND 
EXTENT 
OF 
SUBAWARDS: 


pg. 
62 



72011423RFA00001 


9. 
NAME, ADDRESS, TELEPHONE 
NUMBER, 
AND 
E-MAIL 
ADDRESS 
OF 
THE 
AWARDING 
CONTRACTING/AGREEMENT 
OFFICER 
AND/OR 
THE 
CONTRACTING/AGREEMENT 
OFFICER 
’S 
REPRESENTATIVE 
(AND 
OTHER 
REFERENCES 
AS 
APPLICABLE): 
pg. 
63 



