 

 

Issue Date: November 10, 2022 

Deadline for Questions: November 30, 2022 

Closing Date: January 11, 2023 

Closing Time: 09:00 am, Phnom Penh Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72044223RFA00001 

 

Program Title: USAID Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity II (EQHA II) 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities excluding all countries not included in Geographic 
Code 937, to implement a program entitled “Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity II”. 

 

Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received funding from USAID may be 
subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, ensure adequacy of financial controls 
and establish an indirect cost rate. While one award is anticipated as a result of this Notice of 
Funding Opportunity (NOFO), USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications 
submitted. For the purposes of this NOFO the term "Grant" is synonymous with "Cooperative 
Agreement"; "Grantee" is synonymous with "Recipient"; and "Grant Officer" is synonymous with 
"Agreement Officer". Eligible organizations interested in submitting an application are encouraged 
to read this funding opportunity thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application 
submission requirements and evaluation process. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO 
thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and 
selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the website to 
ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity. It is the 
responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the entire NOFO has been received from the internet in 
its entirety and USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or 
conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, 
please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for 
technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier (UEI) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section 
D.7. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin registration early in the process. The successful applicant will be responsible 
for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives. 


 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to 
all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Award will be made to the responsible applicant whose application best meets the requirements of 
this NOFO and the Merit Review Criteria contained herein. Issuance of this notice of funding 
opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government nor does it 
commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or submission of 
comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant. All 
preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

 

Francis Hall 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition & Assistance 

USAID/Cambodia 


 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

Contents 

 TABLE OF CONTENTS 3 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 20 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 23 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 25 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 47 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 51 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 58 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 59 
ATTACHMENT 1: INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 60 


 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

USAID Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity II (EQHA II) 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 


 

The USAID/Cambodia Mission seeks to procure a new five-year health system strengthening 
activity with the goal of enhancing quality, sustainability and responsiveness of health services in 
the public and private sectors to maximize health outcomes among Cambodians, including 
vulnerable populations. This activity will build on USAID’s previous investments in health system 
strengthening and lessons learned from other stakeholders; and further contribute to the Royal 
Government of Cambodia’s (RGC) upcoming Health Strategic Plan phase 4 (HSP4) in light of the 
decentralization policy. This activity will work with national and subnational health systems to 
strengthen the implementation of national policies and standards to improve private sector quality 
monitoring systems, and to improve the capacity of providers and institutions to provide better and 
more sustainable healthcare services. These include, where permissible and within USAID’s 
manageable interest, assisting to build an overarching enabling environment for Private Sector 
Engagement (PSE); and providing high quality priority health services, including maternal, 
newborn and child health, reproductive health, and infectious diseases. 

 

II. BACKGROUND 


 

A. Country Context 


 

Cambodia has made significant improvements on its health indicators, achieving 2015 Millennium 
Development Goal targets for infant mortality, under-five mortality, maternal mortality, 
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS ahead of schedule. However, gaps remain. Maternal and newborn 
mortality rates are still among the highest in Southeast Asia. Twenty percent of children are still 
stunted from poor nutrition, the decline in new HIV infections among key populations is not on 
track to meet targets, and Cambodia remains among the countries with the highest burden of 
tuberculosis. Across the health system, quality of care is a barrier to improved health outcomes. 
Quality healthcare is defined by WHO to include seven attributes1: 

1 https://www.who.int/health-topics/quality-of-care#tab=tab_1 

● effective - evidence-based 
● safe - avoiding harm to people for whom the care is intended 
● people-centered – responsive to individual preferences, needs and values 



● timely – reducing waiting times and harmful delays 
● equitable – providing care that does not vary in quality on account of gender, ethnicity, 
geographic location, and socio-economic status 
● integrated – providing care that makes available the full range of health services throughout 
the life course 
● efficient – maximizing the benefit of available resources and avoiding waste 


 

Cross-Cutting Health System 

 

The current health sector programs are guided by the Health Strategic Plan 2016-2020 (HSP3), 
which is the third medium term plan of the health sector. Progress in improved service coverage and 
quality have been observed and mechanisms to support the assessment and monitoring quality have 
been established in the public sector. Given the rapid growth of private providers with insufficient 
regulation measures, and although MoH support will continue to focus on advancing safety and 
quality of healthcare through public health systems. To maximize the health outcomes of the 
Cambodian people, the interventions should consider strengthening quality of healthcare in the 
private sector where the majority of care seeking occurs. These interventions include building 
governance and institutional structures and capacity to direct and support quality improvement 
efforts in synergized and harmonized manners; building and implementing the Cambodian National 
Health Accreditation System (CNHAS) for both public and private health facilities in sequenced 
phases; and improving functional compliance mechanisms by setting out and implementing 
minimum standards for service quality and safety as guided by the national policies and guidelines. 

 

Significant challenges constrain the health sector’s ability to improve access to quality healthcare 
services for Cambodians. Lack of universal health insurance coverage, and its links to quality 
assurance of healthcare services still require Cambodians to spend high levels out-of-pocket for 
variable quality healthcare. 

 

In addition, despite MOH efforts to mainstream gender throughout health sector policies and 
practices, significant gaps remain. A significant area for attention includes addressing the lack of 
adequate and coordinated care and services for GBV survivors. Health managers and providers have 
limited understanding on gender responsiveness and social inclusion, which remain priority 
challenges to achieve gender equity in the Cambodian health sector. 

 

According to CDHS 2014, 67% of Cambodian household members visited private sector providers 
for their first time treatment of illnesses or injuries. While some services with acceptable quality 
exist, especially in not-for-profit facilities, quality controls for private services are still lacking. The 
private sector remains poorly regulated mainly because the laws and implementation guidelines are 
still underdeveloped, there is a lack of quality assurance standards, and a lack of enforcement for 
the implementation of existing laws. Common quality concerns in the private sector include 
misdiagnosis, mistreatment and under-referral, including for infectious disease cases, to appropriate 


healthcare facilities. Over-reliance on tertiary care at private facilities and overtreatment is a major 
contributor to Cambodia’s high out-of-pocket costs. 

 

The capacity of private providers varies according to each health profession. Private pharmacies are 
a major source for healthcare seeking due to their geographic proximity, convenient opening hours, 
availability of a range of medicines, simple and quick care, and low cost (no consultation fee) 
compared to private health facilities. The provision of treatment may not fully comply with the 
national guidance and recommended doses, especially for pharmacy staff who are consistently 
present at the pharmacies and provide treatment or advice to patients, but who have been largely left 
out of training on updated diagnosis and treatment guidelines set by different national programs. 
The introduction of the continuing professional development (CPD) for in-service training for 
healthcare providers according to the CPD policy-framework is still at an early stage and not well 
integrated with the national programs’ training. As most healthcare providers are dual practice 
(operating in both public and private sectors), they may receive updated training as a public 
provider. However, their actual application of trained skills at their private practice is not well 
monitored for compliance. 

 

Getting the private sector on board towards better healthcare quality has been a challenge in the 
past, likely due to a lack of coordinating mechanism and influenced by the widespread element of 
dual practice. Greater engagement with the private sector in the development of a quality 
framework and system development is key to securing their support and commitment to national 
efforts toward enhancement of quality healthcare. 

 

Implementation of regulations for both practitioners in public and private facilities, implementation 
of H-EQIP II for public systems, and a strong accreditation system are needed to bring the quality 
of Cambodian healthcare up to regional standards. There is opportunity for the accreditation system 
to provide incentives for private providers by publicly recognizing providers that are accredited and 
operate according to quality standards. The RGC direction to expand social health insurance toward 
UHC, and the implementation of strategic purchasing, will also serve as motivating factors for 
improvement of healthcare services in Cambodia through conditional contracting by the insurance 
institutions. 

 

Maternal and Child Health 

 

The 2021 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey shows continuing progress in maternal and 
child health with the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) at 154 per 100,000 live births, under-five 
mortality and neonatal mortality rates of 15 and 8 per 1,000 live births respectively. However, 
Cambodia missed the MMR target of 130 per 100,000 live births in 2020. Therefore, extra effort is 
needed to achieve the new health target of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 3.1 to lower the 
MMR to less than 70 per 100,000 live births. While the 2021 CDHS shows almost all deliveries 
(99%) and 85% of postnatal visits were attended by skilled birth attendants, the quality of services 


should be improved. Cambodia developed and implemented two consecutive Emergency Obstetric 
and Newborn Care (EmONC) Improvement Plans for the periods of 2010-2015 and 2016-2020. The 
EmONC assessment and reviews in 2020 showed the increased number of Comprehensive EmONC 
Care (CEmONC) and Basic EmONC (BEmONC) facilities. However, Cambodia still has fewer 
than half of the recommended number of functioning EmONC facilities for the country and 
EmONC facilities are still largely concentrated at the hospital level and in urban areas, with one 
province still lacking any EmONC facilities. The needs of newborns with complications are also 
insufficiently met. The same assessment showed that 31.6% of the expected number of women who 
will develop complications were treated in functional EmONC facilities while 0.44% of women 
treated with obstetric complications in those facilities died. It also showed 1.2% of births in all 
facilities surveyed were stillborn or died in the early neonatal period. In order to address these and 
other remaining challenges, a new EmONC Improvement Plan is being proposed for the period 
2021-2025. 

 

Family Planning and Reproductive Health (FP/RH) 

 

Significant progress has been made for reproductive health and family planning (FP) in Cambodia, 
but training and quality assurance of health providers on method mix and FP quality assurance (QA) 
and Quality Improvement (QI) tools still remain a focus of the Ministry of Health (MoH). Capacity 
of service providers, particularly on long acting and permanent methods continue to be challenges. 
New staff and new FP method introduction require ongoing in-service education to equip them to 
provide FP services. A shortage of skilled providers, and common myths and misconceptions are 
leading people to rely on traditional methods. The 2021 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 
(CDHS) shows that 12% of currently married women have an unmet need for family planning 
services, 45% were using modern methods and 17% traditional methods. Among currently married 
women, the contraceptive pill is the most commonly used method (26%), followed by injection 
(6%), and Intrauterine Devices (5%). 

 

Tuberculosis (TB) 

 

With USAID’s contribution, significant progress has been made in the TB control program in 
Cambodia with the reduction of TB incidence by 50% from 2000 to 2018 according to a WHO 
report. The estimated TB incidence in Cambodia declined from 575/100,000 in 2000 to 
423/100,000 in 2011 and 274/100,000 in 2020. In 2021, the National TB Program (NTP) reported 
21,627 cases of TB, a significant decrease compared to 2020. While there have been successes in 
the treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis (DS-TB) and multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) in 
Cambodia, case detection of all types of TB remains a challenge, with almost 50% of cases going 
undetected, which illustrates a large gap in case notification. 

 

There are several factors that contribute to the high number of undetected cases, which include 
inaccessibility of health care services at the community level, lack of knowledge and awareness of 


the symptoms of TB, sub-optimal screening and referral at referral hospitals and health centers, and 
the limited roles of the private sector in these efforts. The burden of MDR-TB in Cambodia is low 
and NTP identified 72 cases in 2021 which are still undetected. 

 

TB services are mainly provided by the public sector, yet little information is known on the private 
sector’s role in TB control. Recently, the national TB program involved pharmacies and private 
clinics in selected ODs to refer presumptive TB patients to diagnose and treat at public health 
facilities. In 2022, NTP has developed the national TB Public Private Mix Operational Guideline 
2021 - 2030, which highlights different modalities of private providers’ roles in screening, diagnosis 
and treatment of TB patients. Based on this guideline and the scale of the private sector and their 
role in health care has increased, they have potential capacity to better support NTP in accelerating 
TB case finding and provision of TB services. 

 

Malaria 

 

USAID, through the President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI), provides technical assistance in malaria 
by strengthening control, elimination, and surveillance activities, as well as monitoring drug 
resistance. These programs have contributed to significantly reducing malaria morbidity and 
mortality in Cambodia over the last 10 years, with zero deaths from malaria since 2018. While 
malaria rates have dropped dramatically, finding and treating the last remaining malaria cases is a 
challenge for the national malaria control program and partners. Efforts will focus on expanding 
screening, social behavior change approaches, and malaria prevention at the community level in 
forested areas to reach the 2025 elimination target. As Cambodia approaches malaria elimination, it 
is important to ensure the availability of capacities and resources needed to prevent, detect, and 
efficiently respond to malaria cases. The focus will shift more towards integration of key vertical 
systems (information, supply chain, financing, etc.) into the wider health system, and integration of 
Village Malaria Workers into a wider Community Health Work platform. 

 

HIV/AIDS 

 

Cambodia has made significant progress in controlling the HIV/AIDS epidemic in recent years. 
USAID has helped reduce the adult HIV prevalence from 1.7 percent in 1998 to 0.6 percent in 2020 
by improving the quality of HIV services, developing innovative ways of finding the last cases and 
improving the cost effectiveness and sustainability of the HIV response. These efforts have 
contributed towards achieving a tenfold reduction in new infections, from 11,000 to 1,100 per year. 
Today, 84% of the estimated 75,000 Cambodians living with HIV know their status, 99% are on 
medication to control the virus, and 97% of those on medication are virally suppressed, which 
greatly reduces their risk to transmit the virus. Ending the epidemic will require finding the 
estimated 12,000 people living with HIV who remain undiagnosed and linking them to treatment. 
Two thirds of new infections occur among key populations and their sexual partners. Reducing new 


infections will also require expanding targeted prevention to key populations, particularly through 
the provision of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) medication. 

 

In the private sector, availability of HIV services remains limited, with insufficient referrals or 
sharing of data between public and private sectors. In the public sector, HIV services are largely 
delivered though vertical parallel systems financed by international donors. Ongoing challenges that 
EQHA II may address include the need to integrate HIV into the national system and increase 
access and quality care in the private sector. 

 

Global Health Security 

 

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the ability of emerging pathogens to cause 
significant public health, economic and societal disruption in all regions of the world, as well as the 
inadequate preparedness for events of this scale. Before COVID-19, there have been many other 
epidemics that have posed similar threats including Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), 
avian influenza in 2005, novel pandemic influenza in 2009 and the emergence of Middle East 
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) in 2012. Much effort has been applied to prevention, detection and 
response for COVID-19 in Cambodia by the MOH, leading the effort, and by partners and donors. 
However, there is a need to strengthen cross-sectoral collaboration, increase respiratory pathogen 
and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) surveillance, improve the implementation of best practices for 
disease detection and response at health facilities, and address the drivers of disease with a focus on 
prevention. 

 

While there have been some improvements in Cambodia’s capacity to exercise emergency response 
plans for disease outbreaks, according to the Global Health Security Index (GHSI) 2021 
study 
2 data, 
Cambodia has an index score of 33 out of 100 for AMR practices, the same score as 2019, 
illustrating no improvement in practices over the past three years. A recent 3 of public 
knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) around AMR in Cambodia highlighted the need for 
outreach that is targeted to the local context and partners with trusted healthcare providers. 

2 https://www.ghsindex.org/country/cambodia/ 

3 https://academic.oup.com/jacamr/article/3/1/dlaa115/6127117 

 

Cambodia was given an index score of zero for biosafety and biosecurity in the GHSI 2021 report, 
demonstrating that there is much need for improved practices in labs and health facilities. While 
more data and analysis is needed on the capacity of human resources for health in this area, there is 
indication that there is great need to increase availability of trained healthcare workers that are able 
to prevent, detect, and respond to diseases with epidemic potential. 

 

B. USAID Involvement in Health System Strengthening and Quality Improvement 



 

USAID has helped to strengthen Cambodia health systems since 2003 with a focus on improving 
the health equity fund (HEF), the social health protection program for the poor and vulnerable; 
provider and institutional capacity building for quality improvement of public health services for 
key infectious diseases, maternal and child health, and reproductive health; improving health 
information systems; and improving logistical management systems. USAID supported the HEF 
system to expand to all public health facilities nationwide, allowing more than three million poor 
Cambodians to access services free of charge. The management of HEF was successfully taken over 
by the RGC, and USAID continues to support national capacity to implement the national policy 
framework on social protection by expanding social health protection for other vulnerable 
populations. USAID’s current support on quality improvement focuses on improved policy, 
guidelines and tools to promote better harmonization of quality improvement within health systems 
in both public and private sectors, improved tools and standards for better regulation and 
accreditation, enhanced capacity of subnational systems to implement quality improvement 
collaborative efforts, and improved quality of preservice training. 

 

III. THEORY OF CHANGE 

 

If Cambodian health policies are improved and implemented, private and public health service 
delivery is better regulated and responsive to the public, and vertical program priorities are met in 
sync with the health system, then Cambodians will have improved health outcomes. 

 

IV. RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

 

Purpose: Enhanced quality, sustainability, and responsiveness of health services in the public and 
private sectors to maximize health outcomes among Cambodians, including vulnerable populations. 

 

To achieve this purpose, EQHA II will support the implementation of key priorities identified by 
MOH and other health stakeholders towards achieving universal health coverage, primarily through 
a focus on health systems advancements, addressing the challenges of reproductive, maternal, and 
child health and communicable disease, and making progress on the governance, regulation, and 
compliance agenda. Health systems advancements call for increasing acceptability and 
accountability of health services, particularly at the subnational level. EQHA II’s focus will include 
strengthening the health workforce, supporting effective governance and regulatory compliance, 
and using digital tools to increase effectiveness and efficiency of the health system. 

 

Making progress on communicable disease elimination will require a simultaneous focus on 
strengthening vertical programs’ ability to identify and treat new infectious disease cases, while also 
planning for their long-term integration into the wider health system. EQHA II can support progress 
on key vertical priorities through a focus on increasing the supply and quality of services in both 
public and private sectors, while also supporting integration opportunities where possible. 


 

EQHA II will also support health systems to address the challenges of governance, regulation, and 
enforcement of compliance through building the capacity of subnational governments in quality 
improvement; strengthening and growing health professional councils; building effective 
accreditation and licensing systems, particularly in the private sector; and supporting health 
facilities to implement continuous quality improvement. 

 

Subject to further funding availability, the Activity may be expanded through use of Opportunity 
Module(s) to address additional priorities that are identified during the course of implementation 
that contribute to any of the three Objectives. 

 

Objective 1: Improved evidence-based policy, guidelines, and strategies for more effective and 
efficient health service systems. 

 

The Activity will provide technical assistance and facilitate systems thinking among key 
stakeholders, including coordinating institutions and national programs/centers, to use evidence for 
policy analysis, develop joint plans or strategies for advocacy, and implementation aimed at 
improving the quality and availability of healthcare services at all levels. Systems thinking refers to 
an understanding of the complex relationships and interactions within systems, and using that 
understanding to define pathways to identifying and resolving health system challenges holistically. 
The Activity will support plans and strategies to promote the integration of national vertical 
programs into the mainstream health systems where possible. The activity will also strengthen 
policies of vertical programs, particularly for MCH, FP, and TB. The analysis and improvement of 
health system policy will have to consider other factors including greater private sector 
involvement, human resource development and management, capacity of the subnational systems to 
lead and monitor the improvement process, patient-centered services, communities of practice 
among healthcare providers and managers, and community participation. The effective 
implementation of set policies by the national institutions at subnational levels will depend 
significantly on the clear standards provided by the national levels. Therefore, the Activity will 
implement this approach with strengthened coordination at national level and in line with the RGC 
Decentralization and Deconcentration (D&D) policy. These interventions will work in coordination 
with the implementation of H-EQIP II and the Global Fund-funded activities within the public 
health system. The Activity will also build on USAID and other donor investments in health 
information systems by working with service providers and managers in both the public and private 
sector to use data for more effective planning for continuing quality improvement. 

 

Illustrative Results: 

● Result 1.1: Policies, guidelines and strategies of national programs are coordinated and 
integrated with MoH, and incorporate health system thinking. 


 


● Result 1.2: Policies, guidelines and strategies addressing specific program areas (such as 
MCH, FP, andTB) are improved, in line with international and country-specific best 
practices and approaches. 


 

● Result 1.3: Documented use of data and evidence for quality improvement, leading to more 
effective planning, monitoring and evaluation, and decision making. 


 

Objective 2: Improved individual and institutional capacity of the public and private sectors to 
implement, monitor and evaluate quality assurance according to the national standards. 

 

The Activity will build on current USAID programming, which seeks to improve national and 
local capacity to provide safe, timely, quality, and effective health services across the continuum of 
healthcare needs. The Activity will continue to build the capacity of the private sector, which 
should be better engaged, regulated, and recognized by the RGC/MOH. The Activity will support 
the implementation of existing and new regulations and accreditation laws in the health sector. 
While MOH and DPs help set up the monitoring and evaluation systems of quality of public health 
services, the Activity will focus on implementation of quality standards as well as strengthening 
monitoring and evaluation of quality compliance and recognition systems of private sector 
services. This activity will also look at the challenges faced by public health care systems and 
provide technical support or facilitate the process of quality improvement at subnational systems 
and promote synergy with the implementation of H-EQIP II. This work will target strengthening 
the capacity of multiple institutions managing licensing and accreditation, including the Hospital 
Services Department of Ministry of Health, Health Professional Councils, Provincial Health 
Departments, and one-window services at provincial and district levels. 

 

EQHA II will also support expanding professional networks in the public and private sectors that 
can foster technical exchange among healthcare professionals, and compile information as a 
technical resource center from which healthcare institutions of both sectors can refer and seek 
technical assistance or services when needed for their quality improvement efforts. 

 

Illustrative Results: 

● Result 2.1: Strengthened systems of national and subnational institutions to manage 
licensing and accreditation of health services. 


 

● Result 2.2: Improved capacity of health providers and managers to monitor and improve 
facility quality, self-regulate, and meet licensing and accreditation standards. 


 

● Result 2.3: Improved organization of the private sector and coordination with the public 
sector at national and subnational levels to develop and implement quality improvement 
policy and guidelines related to both providers behavior and facility quality standards. 


 


Objective 3: Improved individual and institutional capacity of subnational health systems to provide 
quality services to address emerging national program priorities. 

 

In addition to addressing cross-cutting quality improvement challenges in the public and private 
sectors, this activity will also deliver technical assistance to national vertical programs (including 
infectious diseases, reproductive, and maternal health) to strengthen vertical disease service delivery 
at public health facilities, including hospitals and health centers, and private health facilities and 
pharmacies. The interventions will apply updated global, regional and national guidelines using 
integrated approaches. This Activity will work with relevant national programs to identify priority 
issues and facilitate or provide technical assistance from national level to subnational level, with 
particular focus on FP, MCH, TB, and emerging pandemic threats. The areas of support may 
include training, coaching or exchange on updated technical diagnosis and treatment guidelines to 
be implemented by service delivery points. The Activity may also support the introduction of 
innovative approaches that can be jointly defined by the national programs and other stakeholders in 
healthcare systems (such as the GF and H-EQIP II), for example applying digital technologies, 
private sector partnerships, innovative QI improvement plans, etc. 

 

While almost all deliveries and most postnatal visits are attended by skilled birth attendants, the 
quality of MCH services should be improved to accelerate the reduction of maternal and newborn 
mortality. The proposed interventions should address the challenges in Emergency Obstetric and 
Newborn Care (EmONC) so that complications during and after delivery can be prevented. The 
proposed interventions should include innovative approaches to build capacity of the health care 
provider to manage the emergency obstetric and newborn care, which include on-site clinical 
coaching and mentoring. 

 

Further, modern contraceptive use continues to increase steadily at the rate of one percent per year, 
however the unmet need is still very high and use of traditional methods among married couples 
poses risks for unwanted pregnancy. Accessibility and availability of long-term methods at health 
facilities is still challenging, especially in remote areas where the skill of midwives is limited. The 
proposed interventions can include building the capacity of those providers to provide high-quality 
family planning services. 

 

This activity will address infectious disease challenges in Cambodia through leading improvements 
in the quality of health services and operational and policy frameworks that guide infectious disease 
programs. The proposed interventions will contribute to an increase in national TB case detection, 
and quality of diagnosis and treatment by identifying missing TB cases at facility levels using 
systematic screening, and improve health facility staff capacity to diagnose and treat TB. These 
activities should focus on strengthening TB systems and service delivery, particularly at the health 
center level. With the national policy guidance from the National TB Program, private sector 
engagement in TB screening, diagnosis and treatment will be implemented by this Activity in 
selected provinces. 


 

As seen during the COVID-19 pandemic, emerging pandemic threats pose increasing risks to global 
health security and human prosperity. Population growth, climate change, increasing urbanization, 
and international travel and migration all increase the risk for emergence and spread of new 
pathogens. This activity will improve health facility practices that contribute to prevention, 
detection and response for new zoonotic and other infectious disease threats towards strengthening 
health security and preventing the next pandemic. Applying a one-health approach, interventions 
under this activity may address prevention and surveillance of new or known pathogens, 
antimicrobial resistance and bio-safety, and prepare healthcare systems for responding to disease 
outbreaks. 

 

Illustrative Results: 

● Result 3.1: Increased capacity of the private sector health system to provide quality services 
related to family planning, MCH, TB, HIV and other diseases as appropriate. 


 

● Result 3.2: Improved capacity of public providers and strengthened systems to deliver highquality 
emergency obstetric and newborn care (EmONC) services, particularly in rural areas. 


 

● Result 3.3: Improved capacity of providers and strengthened public and private sector 
systems to deliver high-quality family planning services, including long-acting reversible 
family planning and postpartum family planning. 


 

● Result 3.4: Improved capacity of public health care providers and strengthened systems to 
implement comprehensive services to screen, prevent, detect and treat TB services, 
particularly at health center level. 


 

● Result 3.5: Improved healthy facility capacity to prevent, detect and respond to emerging 
pandemic health threats. 


 

Opportunity Module: 

 

Supplementing the intervention description as stated in the Results Framework above, USAID and 
the recipient may identify opportunities for improving our response through this mechanism to 
address specific health priority needs that cannot be precisely identified during the design process, 
but emerge over the course of implementation. Applying the opportunity module(s) may also allow 
this Activity to expand geographic coverage to other provinces/districts as appropriate or expand 
reach within existing provinces. Subject to funding availability, USAID will work with the 
Recipient to identify priority needs and provide technical support by bringing national and 
international expertise to support interventions related to existing Objectives. 

 

V. COORDINATION AND COMPLEMENTARITY 


 

EQHA II will collaborate with a number of USAID projects and other donors to avoid duplication 
of efforts and optimize outcomes. Key USAID collaborators include: 

 

● CMEP2: The Cambodia Malaria Elimination Project 2 (CMEP2), led by URC, is the 
flagship bilateral for malaria case management and surveillance. CMEP2 operates in six 
provinces in the west and south-west of Cambodia. The project is aligned with the US 
President’s Malaria Initiative Strategy (2015-2020) and the Ministry of Health’s Malaria 
Elimination Action Framework 2021-2025 (MEAF2). As the country approaches malaria 
elimination, it becomes important to work on health systems strengthening, integration of 
vertical systems (such as information and supply chain) in horizontal health systems, and 
integrating village malaria workers (VMWs) under a broader Community Health Work 
framework (yet to be developed). 


 

● COMMIT: Community Mobilization Initiatives to End Tuberculosis (COMMIT) is a fiveyear 
project aiming to improve access to high-quality, person-centered TB, drug resistant- 
TB, and TB/HIV services, strengthen TB service delivery platforms, reduce TB transmission 
and disease progression, and accelerate TB research and innovations. The project’s strategy 
aligns with the National TB Program of the National Strategic Plan, WHO End TB Strategy, 
and USAID’s Country Development Cooperation strategy. The project will focus on 
intensifying the TB case finding at community, and public and private health facility levels 
through scientific-based interventions and the introduction of innovative state of art 
diagnostic tools and technology. EQHA II will coordinate with COMMIT on support to 
CENAT and provincial levels on TB service delivery improvement efforts. 


 

● EpiC: Meeting Targets and Maintaining Epidemic Control (EpiC), led by FHI 360, provides 
results-based technical assistance tailored to context and epidemiology that assures sustained 
HIV services at scale and systems that will maintain long-term epidemic control. EpiC and 
EQHA II may collaborate on support to the national HIV program and quality improvement 
efforts targeting HIV providers. 


 

● LHSS: The Local Health System Sustainability Project (LHSS), led by Abt Associates, is a 
global USAID project focused on health systems strengthening. In Cambodia, LHSS focuses 
on expanding social protection systems through global standards and best practices 
incorporated into the implementation of the National Social Protection Policy Framework 
and strengthening the decentralization of health financing functions to ensure effective use 
of resources for health and improve transparency and accountability. 


 

● PHB: The Promoting Healthy Behavior (PHB) project, led by PSI, is active until June 2025 
to promote individual healthy practice on maternal and child health, nutrition, family 
planning, TB, malaria and non-communicable disease. The project is working to create 



demand at community level to adopt healthy behaviors and strengthen the linkage between 
communities and health facilities. 


 

EQHA II will also coordinate and collaborate with other partners and donors active in health 
systems strengthening and healthcare quality improvement in Cambodia, particularly the H-EQIP II 
project, funded with pooled funding from RGC, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, German 
Government, Korea International Cooperation Agency, and the World Bank. This project uses a 
multipronged approach to strengthen the health system with emphasis on supporting improvements 
in quality of care via routine quality assessments in public health systems using the National Quality 
Enhancement Monitoring (NQEM) tools, improving the availability of critical infrastructure, 
strengthening public financial management, and incentivizing improvements in the quality of care 
through Service Delivery Grants (SDG) to health facilities and health management nationwide 
based on quality assessment results. 

 

EQHA II may also collaborate with the Korean Foundation for International Healthcare (KOFIH), 
which works on quality improvement in select provinces and the Global Fund for AIDS, TB and 
Malaria (GFATM). For interventions using funding from PEPFAR, PMI and the TB Accelerator, 
the project may be expected to collaborate with their counterpart prime recipients and technical 
assistance providers. For example, the President’s Malaria Initiative would be expected to 
coordinate with UNOPS. 

 

VI. GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS 

 

This Activity will build upon the previous investment of USAID programs in supporting the reform 
of health systems, especially managers’ and providers’ capacity and policies for improved quality of 
health services in both public and private sectors. The proposed interventions will take place at the 
national and subnational levels. The focus on selected provinces should be on the development of 
enhanced quality improvement and management models, where the implementation of the new law 
on health services management can be implemented and enforced, and lessons learned can be fed 
into national systems. The activities should focus on various health facility levels and types, and 
link with community health networks. In remote geographical areas with lower quality 
improvement, the interventions should demonstrate how access to healthcare services can be 
increased by coordination with other stakeholders in addition to the quality improvement efforts. 
The activity should cover at least 10 focus provinces. The package of interventions may vary by 
province, according to context and need. Focus provinces should be selected in consultation with 
USAID based on RGC and PHD interest and commitment; potential to increase equitable outcomes 
for indigenous and ethnic minority populations; presence and organization of the private health 
sector; and EQHA focus provinces that could benefit from further investment (for example, 
Battambang, Kampong Cham, Tbong Khmum, and Kampong Chhnang). 

 

VII. CROSS-CUTTING THEMES 


 

Private Sector Engagement 

This activity will align with USAID’s Private Sector Engagement Policy and use market-based 
approaches, where appropriate, to increase the impact and sustainability of interventions. Private 
sector engagement (PSE) is a strategic approach to planning and programming through which 
USAID consults, strategizes, aligns, collaborates, and implements with the private sector for greater 
scale, sustainability, and effectiveness of development or humanitarian outcomes. This may include 
engaging with private service providers, supply chain entities, retailers, investors, financial 
institutions, and information/communications technology providers. This activity will focus on 
supporting private providers, facilities, networks and professional associations to comply with 
minimum licensing and accreditation standards and self-regulate to further improve quality. It will 
also work to improve coordination between public and private sectors, improve stewardship and 
oversight of the private sector by the public sector, and strengthen private service delivery in 
priority health areas. 

 

Gender and Inclusive Development 

All interventions must be developed and implemented by taking into account gender and inclusive 
development. Inclusive development interventions combat stigma and discrimination, promote 
empowerment and inclusion of marginalized or underrepresented groups, and improve the lives of 
populations in high-risk situations. The Activity will align its activities with the USAID Gender 
Equality and Female Empowerment Policy, the RGC’s Gender Mainstream National Policy, and 
USAID’s Policy on Promoting the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. As applicable, the Activity will 
work with the Gender Mainstreaming Action Group (GMAG) of MOH to advocate for more 
population-based data disaggregation by sex to address the lack of data on gender gaps, and with 
specific tracking of data to address challenges for marginalized groups, such as indigenous 
populations, ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, LGBTQI+, the elderly and others. 

 

The Activity will advocate with relevant ministries and committees to expand the facilities that 
provide GBV-sensitive services to survivors, such as medical care, and referral for legal support and 
rehabilitation services; and provide technical assistance in line with this direction from the RGC. 
The Activity will also work with GMAG to provide training and capacity building to health care 
managers and health care providers to mainstream gender and inclusion into the healthcare systems 
with supportive supervision practices. 

 

Approximately ten percent of Cambodia’s total population are ethnic minorities (the Cham, people 
of Vietnamese descent, the Chinese, and at least 17 other ethnic groups or indigenous peoples). 
These groups often experience discrimination, social isolation, and economic exclusion. 
Northeastern provinces including Ratanakiri, Kratie, Mondulkiri, Preah Vihear and Kampong Thom 
have the largest populations of indigenous peoples in the country. Some health outcomes in these 
provinces lag behind the national average, for example childhood vaccination rates and child 


nutrition. This activity will target geographic areas and tailor interventions to improve quality of 
healthcare and health outcomes for ethnic minorities and indigenous populations. 

 

Localization/ New Partnership Initiative (NPI) 

USAID’s New Partnerships Initiative (NPI) seeks to improve collaboration with new, 
nontraditional, and local actors, while enhancing local leadership, capacity, and accountability. In 
order to better achieve its objectives sustainably, this activity will engage local, new and 
nontraditional partners through sub-awards, capacity building, and other forms of engagement. 
Partnerships should include focus on expanding outreach to populations that have historically been 
marginalized, including indigenous populations and ethnic minorities. Partnering with local 
organizations can make USAID’s interventions and health facility services more responsive and 
accountable to local people, strengthen feedback systems between communities and facilities, and 
community participation in quality monitoring. 

 

Sustainability 

Sustainability is a key focus of this Activity and all its sub-activities. The proposed interventions 
should provide clear strategies for making quality improvement efforts initiated by the Activity 
sustainable, with a sustainability plan and milestones. To achieve this goal, interventions must be 
country-owned, promoting public and private partnership, led and leaving lasting and integrated 
impacts at the Activity’s end -- including the ability of host country institutions to carry out 
effective quality improvement interventions without external assistance. The Activity will 
implement a collaborative approach with national and subnational stakeholders including RGC, 
civil society, private sector and key development partners of H-EQIP II, the Global Fund, and other 
donors. The focus on systems strengthening, policy, and capacity building made throughout this 
program description is purposely intended to support this principle. To the extent possible, the 
Activity will build upon, strengthen, and complement existing quality improvement systems, 
including those implemented under H-EQIP II, and not create parallel systems. This Activity should 
provide high quality technical assistance to increase the acceptability of new policies among 
stakeholders and RGC to be incorporated into the national policy. 


Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting 

Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) is a set of practices that help us improve our 
development effectiveness. The activity should partner with other key organizations to promote 
synergy and reduce duplication. Learning has always been part of USAID’s work. The Activity will 
focus on the best approach and strategy for knowledge management from the grassroots to national 
level to learn about results and impact at scale. The offeror should, in consultation with USAID, 
develop a set of learning questions from the initial stage of the award and adapt approaches based 
on lessons learned throughout the project. 

 

Digital Health 


In line with the forthcoming Digital Health Strategy of the RGC, EQHA II should pursue 
opportunities to use digital approaches and applications as part of the solutions to meet the intended 
program goal and objectives and in alignment with digital best practices as laid out in USAID’s 
Vision for Action in Digital Health and Digital Investment Principles. Digital tools offer 
opportunities to improve effectiveness and efficiency of health system interventions, and offer a 
wide range of benefits to service providers, their institutions and beneficiaries. Digital technologies 
can be used to improve provider capacity, effective diagnosis and treatment of diseases, interaction 
between providers and patients, patient-centered care, disease-surveillance, program M&E, and 
strengthen referral linkages. It can also support evidence-based decision making and improve 
coordination among care providers and technical support institutions. EQHA II should work with 
key stakeholders to use digital solutions to address the challenges of above areas, which are related 
to quality improvement and assurance, interoperability between systems, digital global goods, 
country ownership, and sustainability of digital systems. 

 

{END OF SECTION A} 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

Subject to funding availability, USAID/Cambodia intends to provide up to $35 million in total 
USAID funding to support this program over a 5-year period. 

 

The base amount for this award is expected to be approximately $30 million. In addition to this 
base amount, the Cooperative Agreement will include an opportunity module of up to $5 million 
inclusive of indirect costs. All funding will be provided on an incremental basis subject to the 
availability of funds and successful performance. USAID reserves the right to change the 
funding amounts, cycle, and terms of the agreement as a result of availability of funding, U.S. 
Government requirements or recipient performance. Should such changes occur, the recipient 
will be notified accordingly. 

 

USAID intends to issue one cooperative agreement resulting from this funding opportunity to 
the responsible applicant who offers the best application in response to this NOFO’s 
requirements, and that includes a calculation of costs that are reasonable and clearly explained. 
However, USAID reserve the right to: (a) reject any or all applications, (b) accept other than the 
lowest cost application, and (c) waive informalities and minor irregularities in applications 
received. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five years. The estimated start date will be June 
1, 2023. 

 

3. Award Type and Substantial Involvement 


 

USAID plans to negotiate and award an assistance instrument known as a Cooperative 
Agreement with the successful applicant for this program. A Cooperative Agreement 
implies a level of “substantial involvement” by USAID. This substantial involvement will 
be through the Agreement Officer, except to the extent that the Agreement Officer delegates 
authority to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) in writing. The intended 
purpose of the substantial involvement during the award is to assist the recipient in 
achieving the supported objectives of the agreement. The anticipated substantial 
involvement elements for this award are listed below (this list does not include approvals 
required by Standard Mandatory Provisions for Non-US NGOs or other applicable law, 
regulation or provision): 

 

a. Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plans: USAID requires the approval of 
implementation plans annually to ensure alignment with stated goals, milestones and 
outputs. The implementation plan communicates how and when the Recipient will complete 
project activities and is drafted annually to describe new activities. This plan will be 
developed in partnership between the Recipient and the AOR. The AOR will ensure that the 
implementation plans fit within the scope, terms and conditions of the agreement. 





 

b. Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity: 




USAID may include the statement “The AO may immediately halt a construction activity if 
identified specifications are not met.” In such cases, the AO must also attach the identified 
specifications to the award when it is being executed. Any material changes to the 
specifications must be treated as an amendment to the award. 

 

c. The Agency’s review and approval of one stage of work, before work can begin on a 
subsequent stage during the period covered by the cooperative agreement. 




 

d. The Agency’s review and approval of substantive provisions of proposed subawards or 
contracts (see definitions in 2 CFR 200). These would be provisions that go beyond existing 
policies on Federal review of recipient procurement standards and sole source procurement. 
2 CFR 200.308 already requires the recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the 
subaward, transfer, or contracting out of any work under an award. This is generally limited 
to approving work by a third party under the agreement. If USAID wishes to reserve any 
further approval rights for subawards or contracts that go beyond existing policies on 
Federal review of grantee procurement standards, it must specifically state such Agency 
involvement in the substantial involvement provision of the agreement. 




 

e. Approval of Specified Key Personnel: Key personnel require concurrence from the AOR 
and approval from the AO. 




 

f. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation: The Agency and recipient 
collaboration or joint participation, such as when the recipient’s successful accomplishment 
of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical knowledge. There should be 
sufficient reason for the Agency’s involvement and the involvement should be specifically 
tailored to support identified elements in the program description. Additionally, if the 
program establishes an advisory committee that provides advice to the recipient, USAID 
may participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees must only deal 
with programmatic or technical issues, and not routine administrative matters. 




 

g. Agency monitoring to permit specific kinds of direction or redirection of the work because 
of the interrelationships with other projects or activities. All such direction or redirection 
must be within the program description budget, and other terms and conditions of the award. 




 

h. Direct agency operational involvement or participation to ensure compliance with statutory 
requirements such as civil rights, environmental protection, and provisions for people with 
disabilities that exceeds the Agency’s role that is normally part of the general statutory 
requirements understood in advance of the award. 




 

i. Highly prescriptive Agency requirements established prior to award that limit the recipient’s 
discretion with respect to the scope of services offered, organizational structure, staffing, 
mode of operation, and other management processes, coupled with close monitoring or 
operational involvement during performance over and above the normal exercise of Federal 
stewardship responsibilities to ensure compliance with these requirements. 




 


4. Authorized Geographic Code 


 

The Authorized Geographic Code is 937 for the procurement of goods and services under the 
resulting award. Code 937 is defined as the United States, the cooperating/recipient country, and 
developing countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that 
is a prohibited source. 

 

5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the USAID 
Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity II, which is authorized by Federal statute. 

 

The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program 
objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of 
sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering 
Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the 
terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

 

{END OF SECTION B} 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

U.S. and non-US organizations from the authorized geographic code (937) may participate 
under this NOFO. USAID encourages applications from potential new partners. 

 

USAID will not accept applications from individuals. All applications must be legally 
recognized organizational entities under applicable law. 

 

Potential for-profit applicants must note that USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit 
to the prime Recipient under assistance instruments. Forgone profit does not qualify as costshare. 


 

Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial assistance on the same basis 
as any other organization and are subject to the protections and requirements of Federal law. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant(s) will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective recipient has the 
necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – 
or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the 
terms and conditions of the award. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 


 

Cost share is required for the applicant to be eligible. The proposed cost share will not be rated 
but its amount and composition will be reviewed by the Merit Review Committee (MRC) for 
potential impact on the implementation and sustainability of the project's outcomes, and it may 
become a deciding factor in identifying the apparently successful application, in case two or 
more applications are equally rated. 

 

USAID has established a minimum cost share of $2,000,000 for the recipient of the award. 
Such funds may be mobilized from the recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation 
donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private businesses that 
contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities at the country level. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and CAs, please see the ADS 303.3.10 and 2 CFR 200.307 
for U.S. NGOs. For non-US NGOs, all cost sharing would be subject to the Required as 
Applicable Provision “Cost Sharing” in the Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 303, 
Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental Organizations. 


 

3. Number of Applications 


 

An Applicant may submit only one application per organization. Applicants are directed to review 
the other requirements for applications specified herein, including, but not limited to, Sections D 
and E herein. 

 

{END OF SECTION C} 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Honey Sokry 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Cambodia 

#1 Street 96, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 

Phnom Penh, Cambodia 

Email: hsokry@usaid.gov 

(with a copy to fhall@usaid.gov) 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and any 
subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All applications must be submitted 
according to the directions regarding application submission in this NOFO and not necessarily 
to the point of contact. 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to the Agency Point of Contact 
above with a copy to fhall@usaid.gov no later than the due date and time provided on the cover 
page. Therefore, applicants should submit all questions prior to the deadline listed on the cover 
page. 

 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on Grants.gov, if 
that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial 
to any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov for any amendments. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Applicants are expected to review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. 
Failure to do so will be at the applicant’s risk. 

 

In compliance with 5 CFR 1320, the Paperwork Reduction Act, applications (technical and 
cost) need to be submitted in electronic format only. 

 

Applications and modifications thereof must be submitted in two separate volumes 
electronically via email to Ms. Honey Sokry, Acquisition and Assistance Specialist at 
hsokry@usaid.gov, and cc fhall@usaid.gov. 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant shall furnish the information required by this NOFO. A complete application 
includes: (a) one complete technical application; and (b) one complete cost/business application. 

 


Email submissions must include the following in the subject line: 

 

“Technical application under 72044223RFA00001, submitted by: [name of Applicant 
organization].” 

 

“Cost application under 72044223RFA00001, submitted by: [name of Applicant 
organization].” 

 

This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
● Program name 
● Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303 


 

All applications received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness to the 
NOFO and the application format. Section E: Application Review Information addresses the 
technical review procedures for the applications. No additions or modifications will be accepted 
after the submission date. 

 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant shall be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want to be disclosed to the public for any purpose 
or used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the title page with 
the following legend: 

 

“This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government and 
shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose other than 
to evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this Applicant as a result of – 
or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government shall have the right 
to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting grant. This 


restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this 
data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers} and, mark each sheet of data it 
wished to restrict with the following legend: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title 
page of this application.” 

 

Applicants should retain for their records one (1) copy of the application and all enclosures 
which accompany it. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 


 

It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and 
received on time. 

 

USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion 
processes associated with electronic submissions. 

 

For an application sent by multiple emails, please indicate in the subject line of the 

email whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of 
multiple emails (if more than one is sent) and of attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For 
example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email should have a 
subject line which says: "[organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

Our preference is that the technical application and the cost application be submitted as single 
email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application into a 
single document before sending them. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how 
to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic 
applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. Only applications received by the 
submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness to the NOFO and the application 
format. No addition or modifications will be accepted after the submission date. 

 

After you have sent your applications electronically, immediately check your own email to 
confirm that the attachments you intended to send were indeed sent. If you discover an error in 
your transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or 
indicate in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not 
send the same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it 
is a "corrected" email. Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of USAID, nor does it commit USAID to pay for any costs incurred in the preparation or 
submission of an application. 

 


USAID may make an award on the basis of initial applications received, without requesting 
clarifications or additional detail on an application. Therefore, each initial application should 
contain the applicant's best terms from a cost and technical standpoint. USAID reserves the 
right, however, to obtain clarifications or additional detail on an application. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 


The technical application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection for 
award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The technical application should be specific, 
complete and presented concisely. The application should demonstrate the Applicant's 
capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this program. The application 
should take into account the requirements of the program and evaluation criteria found in this 
NOFO. 

 

Technical applications must not exceed 25 single-spaced typed pages, utilizing Times New 
Roman 12pt font, typed on standard 8½” x 11” sized paper with one-inch margins (both right 
and left) and each page numbered consecutively. Annexes are excluded from the page 
limitation. Applicants are advised that any pages exceeding the limit will not be considered for 
evaluation. The technical application should include Executive Summary (not to exceed 2 
pages) and Technical Approach, Management and Staffing Plan, Key Personnel, Institutional 
Capacity (not to exceed 23 pages). 

 

The technical approach must clearly address the factors outlined in the evaluation criteria. The 
technical application should be specific, complete and presented concisely. The application 
should demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the 
objectives and goals of this program. 

 

Application Contents: The Technical Application, at a minimum, must contain the following 
(specific page limits or exclusions from the overall page limit are stated where applicable): 

 

a. Cover Page (not to exceed 1 page, not included in the overall page limit) 


 

The Cover Page should include the following: 

 

• Program/Project title; 
• NOFO reference number; 
• Name of organization applying for the agreement; 
• Name(s) of all proposed partner(s)/sub-recipient(s) (not just principal partners); 
• Contact person, telephone number, fax number, address, and name(s) and title(s) of 
person(s) who prepared the application, and corresponding signatures; and 
• If applicable, the TIN and DUNS numbers of the applicant must also be listed on the 
cover page. 




 

b. Table of Contents (not to exceed 1 page, not included in the overall page limit) 


 

c. Acronyms List (not included in the overall page limit) 


 


d. Executive Summary (not to exceed 2 pages): Briefly describe: a) the proposed vision and 
goals for the program and b) the managerial approach and resources that the applicant will 
bring to bear on the overall management of the program. 


 

e. Technical Approach (not to exceed 23 pages) to include the following sections: 


i. Technical Approach (17 pages) 

ii. Management and Staffing Plan (2 pages) 

iii. Key Personnel (2 pages) 

iv. Institutional Capacity (2 pages) 

 

f. Annexes (no page limit, not included in the overall page limit) 


i. Draft Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 

ii. Organizational Chart and Staffing Plan Matrix 

iii. Key Personnel Resumes/CVs and Letters of Commitment 

iv. Draft work plan Gantt chart 

v. Opportunity Module Planning 

 

 

(1) Technical Approach 




 

The technical application should be specific, complete and presented concisely. The 
application should demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the objectives and goals of this activity. 

 

Applicants must provide a narrative analysis reflecting their understanding of the 
development challenges and key issues relevant to this activity, their underlying problems 
and root causes, for both public and private sectors; and describe potential solutions and 
proposed approaches that are technically sound, evidence-based, feasible, and contextappropriate 
in order to sustainably achieve the objectives and results outlined in the Program 
Description. Proposed solutions should also align with and reflect an understanding of the 
cross-cutting themes mentioned in the Program Description. 

 

The methodology applied for quality improvement should incorporate strategies to address 
gender-related inequities in health service delivery. 

 

Applicants must demonstrate their familiarity with the range of actors and stakeholders 
involved in improving quality of health care in Cambodia. Applicants should describe how 
they will establish relationships of collaboration and trust among stakeholders at all levels to 
create ownership, and leverage resources and expertise (including linkages with other 
development programs and partners in public and private sectors, and among other key 
health system actors). 

 


The technical approach should reflect clear intervention logic, identifying what strategies 
will be implemented to achieve the overall goal and objectives listed in the Program 
Description. 

 

Applicants must include the following Annexes to support the technical approach. While 
there is no page limit for this portion, applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible: 

 

● A draft monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) plan, including a logical framework, 
not exceeding five pages, highlighting the logical linkages between intended strategies 
and activities to achieve the three objectives. Applicants must propose the most relevant 
and feasible indicators for measuring program results at each level of the results 
framework. The proposed indicators should be aligned with the National Health 
Strategic Plan, USAID standard and customized indicators and the global health 
indicator reference list. A final comprehensive MEL plan will be required after the 
award is made. 


 

● A draft workplan Gantt chart providing an overview of the key activities envisioned 
during the first project year in line with the applicant’s technical approach, and their 
expected sequencing and timing. 
● An Opportunity Module planning summary where Applicants describe how they would 
ensure flexibility to adapt or deepen their approach and operations if USAID makes (up 
to $5 million in) funding available through the Opportunity Module(s) identified during 
implementation. A brief summary should reflect how the applicant will respond to 
additional funding resulting from an opportunity module. This includes, for example, a 
discussion of how additional funding would affect your ongoing activities, the decisionmaking 
process for expenditures of such additional funds, and the selection process for 
expansion of ongoing activities. The program description to be accomplished under the 
Opportunity Module does not need to be identified in the application, but will be 
proposed during implementation and should address at least one of the Activity’s key 
objectives. 
(2) Management and Staffing Plan 





 

Applicants must submit a management and staffing plan, which describes the applicant’s 
overall management approach and staffing plan. The management and staffing plan must 
specify the composition and organizational context of the entire implementation team 
(including home office support) and specify clear lines of supervision, accountability, 
decision-making and responsibility including management of subcontractors and subrecipients. 
Applicants will indicate the number of positions, their functions, whether they 
will be local or expatriate hires, and the skills and experience they are expected to 
demonstrate. The use of international technical assistance (TA) should be limited to those 
whose skills are not currently available in-country. The applicant must adequately justify the 


need and appropriateness for hiring each specific expatriate position. The plan must include 
an approach and timeline to ensure rapid and efficient start-up of both operational and 
technical aspects of the activity. Applicants must also outline a clear scheme on partnerships 
and collaboration with a diverse range of actors and stakeholders including (but not limited 
to) U.S. Government and Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) agencies, other bilateral 
and multilateral donors, local public/private sector partners, local governmental structures, 
and international and local non-governmental organizations. Applicants should include in 
their staffing plans a full-time gender specialist position. 

 

Letters of commitment from sub-partners, if applicable, must be included as an annex. A 
proposed Organizational Chart and Staffing Plan Matrix should also be included as an 
annex. 

 

(3) Key Personnel 




 

USAID requires four full time positions as Key Personnel. Key personnel include full-time 
and long-term professional personnel whose participation in the proposed activities is 
considered to be essential. 

 

1. Chief of Party (COP) 

2. Deputy COP 

3. Quality Improvement Advisor 

4. Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Manager 

 

Applicants will indicate the names of each proposed Key Personnel candidate along with a 
brief statement of why the proposed individual is suitable for the position. In an Annex, 
applicants will provide CV and a letter of commitment for each Key Personnel. 

 

● The Chief of Party (COP) should serve and reside in Phnom Penh for the length of 
the project. The COP must have a master’s degree or higher in Public Health, Health 
Science, Development Studies, or an equivalent related area of study. S/he must have 
at least 10 years of experience managing large health quality improvement projects 
in developing countries. S/he must also have a good track record of working with 
senior government officials, influencing policy, and supporting policy changes based 
on evidence or technical developments. Ability to coordinate with donors and other 
NGOs working in the health sector is required. Prior experience managing U.S. 
Government-funded projects or similar international donor programs is also 
preferred but not required. Excellent oral and written communication skills in 
English are required. 


 

● The Deputy Chief of Party will work under the supervision of the Chief of Party to 
plan and oversee the implementation of this activity. S/he must have a master’s 
degree or higher in public health, Health Science, Business Administration, 
Development, or an equivalent related area of study. She/he must have a minimum of 
7 years of work experience in project operations and management in low resource 
setting countries. The DCOP must have demonstrated experience in government 



coordination. Excellent oral and written communication skills in English and Khmer 
are required. 


 

● The Quality Improvement advisor will work under supervision of the Chief of Party 
to plan and coordinate for quality improvement in the public and private sector. S/he 
must have at least a Master’s degree in Public Health, Development Studies, 
business administration or an equivalent related area of study. S/he must have a 
minimum of 10 years of work experience in international/regional health services 
quality improvement. Excellent oral and written communication skills in English are 
required. 


 

● The Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Manager must have a Bachelor’s degree 
or higher in the field of social or research sciences, such as public health, statistics, 
or other fields relevant to program monitoring and evaluation. The proposed 
candidate must have at least 7 years demonstrated experience, in a developing 
country context in monitoring and evaluation of health programs. S/he must 
demonstrate strong skills in research and design of data systems/management 
information systems, and be thoroughly conversant with internationally used 
measures of health impact. Excellent oral and written communication skills in 
English and Khmer are required. 


 

The applicant must submit resumes/CVs and letters of commitment of key personnel in the 
annex. 

 

(4) Institutional Capacity 




 

The Applicant must discuss its recent and relevant technical and field experience and quality 
of performance in programs or projects of similar technical content and scope in developing 
countries. 

 

The Applicant must also discuss how this experience is relevant to the success of the 
program specified in the Program Description. This section must include a discussion of 
capabilities and capacities of Applicants and their major sub-partners to effectively and 
efficiently implement the activities required in the Program Description. 

 

The Applicant must describe their experience in working collaboratively with host 
government ministries, and relevant health development partners with examples of successes 
from recent and existing programs that contribute to strengthening quality of health services 
in a similar context. 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 


The following section describes the Cost/Business documentation that applicants must submit to 
USAID prior to award. This documentation enables an Agreement Officer (AO) to determine 
that the proposed costs are reasonable, allowable, and allocable, and make a positive risk 
assessment (meaning that the applicant possesses or has the ability to obtain the necessary 
management competence to plan and carry out the assistance program to be funded, and that the 
applicant will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other 
assets provided by USAID). While there is no page limit for this portion, applicants are 


encouraged to be as concise as possible, while providing the necessary detail to address the 
following. The cost application must cover the full period of performance using the budget 
format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Applicants must include a detailed five-year budget, with accompanying budget narratives for 
the application. The budget must provide in detail the total costs for implementation of the 
program that the organization is proposing. As specified earlier, the applicant should submit the 
Cost/Business application formatted in Word 2010 or later (for the budget narrative) and Excel 
2010 or later (for the budget itself). The applicant must submit the full SF-424 series, which 
includes (web link provided below): 

 

● SF-424, Application for Federal Assistance 
● SF-424A, Budget Information – Non-construction Programs; and 
● SF-424B, Assurance – Non-construction Programs 


 

Opportunity Module: The Applicant must include a plug figure for the Opportunity Module in 
the amount of $5 million (inclusive of Indirect Costs) as a separate line item in the SF-424A 
(under Section B - Budget Categories, h. Other) as well as a separate line item in the detailed 
budget. 

 

If the applicant has established a consortium or another type of legal relationship with its 
partners, the Cost/Business application must include a copy of the document that specifies the 
legal relationship between the parties. This document should include a full discussion of the 
relationship between the organizations including: identification of the lead applicant with whom 
USAID will work for purposes of Agreement administration; identification of the applicant 
responsible for accounting; discussion of how the Agreement effort will be allocated among the 
parties; and specification of the express agreement of the principals thereto to be held jointly 
and severally liable for the acts or omissions of the other. 

 

To support the proposed costs, please provide detailed budget notes/narrative for all costs that 
explain how the costs were derived as described under section (iv) of the cost application below. 
The following provides guidance on what is needed: 

 

● The breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to the costs of, if 
applicable, headquarters, regional, and/or country offices. Project management and 
administrative costs will be shared equitably across all funding sources. 
● The breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization involved in the program. 
● The costs associated with external, expatriate technical assistance and those associated with 
local in-country technical assistance. 
● The breakdown of any financial and in-kind contributions of all organizations involved in 
implementing this Cooperative Agreement. 
● A description of how the costs are allocated. 
● Potential contributions of non-USAID or private commercial donors to this Cooperative 
Agreement, and the composition of the proposed cost share. 
● Procurement plan for commodities (if applicable). 


 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections: 


 

● Cover Page 
● SF424 Forms 
● Budget 
● Budget Narrative 
● Evidence of Responsible the Agreement Officer can use to determine the 
Applicant 
● Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the Recipient 
● Certificate of Compliance (if applicable) 
● Consortium Documentation (if applicable) 


 

a) Cover Page: The Cost Application cover page must contain the same information as the 
Technical Application cover page. 


 

b) SF-424, SF-424A, and SF-424B 


 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard 
Forms can be accessed electronically at https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424- 
family.html 

 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in a rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 


 

Applicants must complete the Certifications, Assurances, and Representations and include a 
PDF with the full application submission: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mav 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition 
and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget 


 

The budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2010 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Budget items with the total zero 
value should not be included in the budget. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise 
inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make an 
award, and will result in a rejection of the cost application. 

 

The budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents for the prime applicant 
and each partner, at a minimum: 

 


o Summary budget, must be inclusive of all project costs (USAID-funded and cost share), 
broken out by major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant 
and each partner for the entire period of the project. 




 

o Detailed budget, which is a detailed version of the Summary Budget. The detailed budget 
must reflect each estimated cost item, broken out. Detailed budget must include a 
breakdown by year, by budget category and budget line items for all federal funding and 
cost share for the entire implementation period of the project. Each cost must be specified. 
Unallowable costs and costs without a clear definition (such as “Miscellaneous”, “Other”, 
etc.) will not be accepted. 




 

The detailed budgets for the applicant and each partner must contain the following budget 
categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

● Personnel: must be separated into expatriate and local personnel and include direct 
salaries and wages only (not consultants or partners). All personnel must be proposed in 
accordance with each company’s personnel policies. Salaries for each proposed labor 
category must be expressed in an amount per workday with the corresponding level of 
effort required for each labor category (number of workdays) and then calculated to a 
total cost for each cost period where the salary would be applicable. All rates must be 
proposed as unburdened daily rates exclusive of benefits and/or fees (if any). If 
applicable, the magnitude of the proposed level of effort should reflect the startup and 
close down phases of the project. 


 

The budget narrative must include as much information as possible about the personnel’s 
name, labor category, and unburdened daily rate, level of effort and salary escalation 
factors. Explain all assumptions in the budget narrative. If the organization has standing 
policies across all projects for annual salary escalations that exceed current inflation 
rates, those policies and the effective date of those policies must be provided with the 
application. The applicant must also confirm that the policy applies to all staff across all 
projects. 

 

● Fringe Benefits: if the company has a fringe benefit rate that has been approved by a 
federal agency, such rate should be used and evidence of its approval should be provided 
(i.e. a copy of the organization’s NICRA). 


 

If a fringe benefit rate has not been approved, the application should propose a rate and 
explain how the rate was determined; in this case, the narrative must include a detailed 
breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., unemployment insurance, 
worker’s compensation, health and life insurance, retirement, FICA, etc.) and the costs 
of each, expressed in dollars and as a percentage of salaries. If leave and/or holidays are 
included in the latter, the number of work days per year must be prorated accordingly, to 
avoid the double charge. 

 

● Consultants: if the applicant and partners propose consultants, whose services are 
directly related to the project, the budget must contain a line item for each such 
consultant, using unburdened daily rates. Similar information should be provided for 



Consultants as provided for Personnel. In the budget summary, costs for Consultants 
must be included under Contractual budget category. Consulting services not part of the 
technical scope/delivery of the award (logistical support services such as audit services, 
IT support, security, etc.) must be included under Other Direct Costs. 


 

● Travel & Transportation: must be separated into international and domestic travel. 
Travel costs may include transportation, per diem, taxi transfers to/from airport, 
insurance, etc. For international travel, costs may also include visa, inoculations, 
MedEvac and DBA (when applicable). Within each category, details must be provided 
to explain the purpose of the trip, the number of trips, the mode of travel (airfare, train or 
other), the departure and arrival cities, the number of travelers, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem must be based on the organization’s travel policies, as well as align with 
the Department of State’s Standardized Regulations (DSSR). When appropriate please 
provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as the organization’s travel 
policy, and include all assumptions in the budget narrative. 


 

● Equipment: must contain a line item for each type of equipment, including information 
on estimated models, cost per unit and number of units. The budget narrative must 
include the purpose of the equipment and the basis for the estimates. Explain all 
assumptions in the budget narrative, including the proposed number of units and annual 
escalation factors (if any). 


 

● Supplies: must include a line item for each type of supply, including information on cost 
per unit and quantity. The budget narrative must include the purpose of the supplies and 
the basis for the estimates. Explain all assumptions in the budget narrative, including the 
proposed number of units and annual escalation factors (if any). 


 

● Contractual: specify the services or goods to be contracted out either through a 
subcontract or a sub-grant. The subcontractors’/sub-grantees’ budgets must follow the 
same format and provide a similar level of detail as the applicant’s budget. Contractual 
services not part of the technical scope/delivery of the award (logistical support services 
such as audit services, IT support, security, etc.) must be included under Other Direct 
Costs. Additionally, Consultant costs should be included under this Budget Category. 
The proposed funding amounts may be included as line items in the budget and 
illustrative activities. The sub-grants and small grants portion of the Program should 
total at least 20 percent of the total award amount. 


 

● Other Direct Costs must be separated into program costs and operational costs. 


 

- Program Costs may include meeting costs, training sessions, workshops, etc. A 
detailed cost buildup for each element must be included in a separate worksheet or a 
tab to specify the number of events and the costs per one event (such as facility 
rental, audio visual rental, meals, local travel for participants, etc.) Meals and local 
travel must not be duplicated for the applicant’s staff in travel and transportation, but 
must only cover non-applicant or non-partner employees attending the 
meetings/trainings. Explain all assumptions in the budget narrative, including the 
proposed number of units and annual escalation factors (if any). 



 

- Operational Costs may include office rent, utilities, communication, maintenance or 
service costs, costs associated with implementation of Branding and Marking Plan, 
costs for services not part of the technical scope/delivery of the award (i.e. logistical 
support services), taxes (if applicable), etc. Explain all assumptions in the budget 
narrative, including rates, quantity and annual escalation factors (if any). 


 

● Indirect Costs must be supported with information to substantiate the calculation of the 
indirect cost. If the applicant (and each partner, if applicable) has received one of the 
following, it must provide the document in the cost application to substantiate the 
indirect cost: 1) a letter from a cognizant U.S. Federal audit agency or a Negotiated 
Indirect Cost Agreement (NICRA); or 2) a narrative that supports how the indirect rates 
were calculated. 


 

If the prime applicant does not have a NICRA, the applicant must submit the following: 

 

Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public Accountant 
(CPA) documenting the review of the financial statements was performed in accordance 
with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; and that 
management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial 
statements in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework and for 
designing, implementing and maintaining internal control relevant to the preparation. 
The accountant must also state the he or she is not aware of any material modifications 
that should be made to the financial statements; or 

 

Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issued report documenting the audit 
was conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), and 
the financial statements are the responsibility of management. It also provides an opinion 
that the financial statements present fairly in all material respects, and the financial 
position of the company and the results of operations are in conformity with the 
applicable financial reporting framework (or issues a qualified opinion if the financial 
statements are not in conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework.) 

 

● Cost Share: If cost share is proposed, applicants should state the proposed amount of 
cost-sharing resources to be mobilized over the life of the agreement and specify the 
sources of such resources, and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants 
should also provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) 
of all organizations involved in implementing the resulting Assistance award. The 
applicant and each partner proposing cost share must confirm that: 


 

- The proposed cost share contributions are not included as cost share contributions for 
any other U.S. Government (USG)-assisted program; and 


 

- Are necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient accomplishment of this 
award’s objectives. 


 


A cost analysis will be performed for the apparently successful Applicant. Budget information 
required from the apparently successful Applicant should be in enough detail to determine the 
proposed cost for the Applicant’s program to be allocable, allowable and reasonable. 

 

e) Budget Narrative 


 

The application must have an accompanying detailed budget narrative and justification that 
provides in detail the total program amount for implementation of the program your 
organization is proposing. The budget narrative should provide information regarding the basis 
of estimate for each line item, including reference to sources used to substantiate the cost 
estimate (e.g. organization's policy, payroll document, vendor quotes, etc.). 

 

A breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to the costs of, if applicable, 
headquarters, regional and/or country offices. Applicants who intend to utilize contractors or 
subrecipients should indicate the extent intended and a complete cost breakdown. Extensive 
contracts/agreement financial plans should follow the same cost format as submitted by the 
primary Applicant. A breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization, contract or 
sub/awardee involved in the program should be provided. 

 

Pursuant to 2 CFR 200 Contract means a legal instrument by which the Applicant purchases 
property or services needed to carry out the project or program under a resulting award. The 
term does not include a legal instrument when the substance of the transaction meets the 
definition of a Federal award or subaward (see § 200.92 Subaward), even if the Applicant 
considers it a contract. The Applicant must work to be performed, the risk borne by the 
contractor, the contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, the quality of its record of 
past performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar 
work. 

 

 

f) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 


 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

g) Approval of Subawards 


 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 



● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

h) Consortium Documentation 


 

If the applicant has established a consortium, or other type of legal relationship with its partners, 
the Cost Application must include a copy of the legal relationship between the parties. The 
agreement should include a full discussion of the relationship between the applicant and 
partner(s), including identification of the applicant with whom USAID will work with for 
purposes of agreement administration, identity of the applicant which will have accounting 
responsibility, how agreement effort will be allocated and the express agreement of the 
principals thereto to be held jointly and severely liable for the acts or omissions of the other. 

 

7. Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) and SAM Registration 


 

Applicants must obtain a Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) and register in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) (https://sam.gov/) in order to be eligible to receive federal assistance, such 
as grants and cooperative agreements. Unless an exemption applies (see ADS 303maz), 
applicants must be registered in SAM prior to submitting an application for award for USAID’s 
consideration. Recipients must maintain an active SAM registration while they have an active 
award. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or entity that is exempted from 
UEI/SAM requirements under 2 CFR 25.110) is required to: 

1. Provide a valid UEI for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 

2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. 

3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during 
which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a 
Federal awarding agency. 

 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for 
making an award to another applicant. 

 

Applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start Guide 
and a video, on https://sam.gov/. 

 

8. History of Performance 


 


The apparently successful Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of 
performance for all its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements 
involving similar or related programs, not to exceed the past three years, as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 
• Award Number; 
• Activity Title; 
• A brief description of the activity; 
• Period of Performance; 
• Award Amount; 
• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three years; and 
• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work 
at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact 
information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 




 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain from any sources relevant 
information concerning an Applicant’s history of performance and may consider such 
information in its review of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional 
information and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the 
risk assessment. 

 

9. Funding Restrictions 


 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.5 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements 
set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

10. Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 


 

Applicants do not need to submit a draft Branding Strategy and Marking Plan in the 
initial applications. Under 2 CFR 700.16, USAID requires the submission of a Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan from only the apparently successful applicant. It is a Federal 
statutory and regulatory requirement that all overseas programs, projects, activities, public 
communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under an assistance 
award or sub-award must be appropriately marked with the USAID identity. More information 
on Branding Strategy and Marking Plan are available at 


https://www.usaid.gov/branding/assistance-awards/. Please see Section F for more information 
on this plan. Only the apparently successful applicant will need to prepare a full Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan. 

 

The apparently successful applicant will follow the following provisions when preparing the 
Branding Strategy and Marking Plan: 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and 
how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 






 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers 
no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in 
the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
clarifications with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated 
Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID 
logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the 
USAID Web site at https://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section F of the NOFO 
or APS state that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal or tagline. 

 

(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or with) 
the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when 
acknowledging contributions. 

 

(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 

 


(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 

 

(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. Section F of the NOFO or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use 
of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcements, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 
country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 
forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is 
from the American People.” 

 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support 
this project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from the host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, 
and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's 
cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 


 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 


a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other 
items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and 
brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the 
official marking for the Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at 
https://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section F of the NOFO or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 






 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 






 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 






 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in 
the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
clarifications with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated 
Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 






 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 






 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 
the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the 
award, including: 


 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 

 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio-visual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, 
media, or communications products funded by USAID; 

 

(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 

 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 

 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID 
Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge 
USAID and the support of the American people. 

 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 


 


(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 

 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 

 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 
and where the applicant will place the marking; 

 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 

 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation 
of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 


 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 
goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 

 

(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant 
must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

 

(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 
particular item or product is better positioned as a host-country government item or 
product. 

 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the 
item or commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 

 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 
must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or 
otherwise be inappropriate. 

 

(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 

 


f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and 
will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to 
ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated 
objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 






 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative 
agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 






 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

11. Conscience Clause Implementation (Assistance) (February 2012) 


 

a. An organization, including a faith-based organization, that is otherwise eligible to receive 
funds under this agreement for HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, or care— 


 

(1) Shall not be required, as a condition of receiving such assistance— 


 

(i) to endorse or utilize a multisectoral or comprehensive approach to combating 
HIV/AIDS; or 

 

(ii) to endorse, utilize, make a referral to, become integrated with, or otherwise 
participate in any program or activity to which the organization has a religious or moral 
objection; and 

 

(2) Shall not be discriminated against in the solicitation or issuance of grants, contracts, or 
cooperative agreements for refusing to meet any requirement described in paragraph 
(a)(1) above. 


 

b. An applicant who believes that this solicitation contains provisions or requirements that 
would require it to endorse or use an approach or participate in an activity to which it has a 
religious or moral objection must so notify the cognizant Agreement Officer in accordance 
with the Mandatory Standard Provision titled “Notices” as soon as possible, and in any event 
not later than 15 calendar days before the deadline for submission of applications under this 
solicitation. The applicant must advise which activity(ies) it could not implement and the 
nature of the religious or moral objection. 


 

c. In responding to the solicitation, an applicant with a religious or moral objection may 
compete for any funding opportunity as a prime partner, or as a leader or member of a 
consortium that comes together to compete for an award. Alternatively, such applicant may 
limit its application to those activities it can undertake and must indicate in its submission 
the activity(ies) it has excluded based on religious or moral objection. The offeror’s proposal 
will be evaluated based on the activities for which a proposal is submitted, and will not be 
evaluated favorably or unfavorably due to the absence of a proposal addressing the 
activity(ies) to which it objected and which it thus omitted. In addition to the notification in 
paragraph (b) above, the applicant must meet the submission date provided for in the 
solicitation. 



 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

12. Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 


 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or 
an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in 
the competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after 
submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO 
no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing 
for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but 
are not limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access 
to non-public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant 
or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

 

{END OF SECTION D} 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Criteria 


 

Eligible, responsive applications will be reviewed in accordance with the merit review criteria, 
the application and submission information in Section D, and the program description 
information in Section A. Applications that do not meet the eligibility criteria will not be 
considered for award. 

 

The technical application will be reviewed in accordance with the technical merit review criteria 
set forth below. The cost application will be reviewed in accordance with the cost criteria set 
forth below. If an application is recommended for award following this review, technical and 
cost clarification questions may or may not be issued to the apparently successful applicant(s). 

 

Applicants should note that the technical merit review criteria serve to: (a) identify the 
significant issues which applicants should address in their applications; and (b) set the standard 
against which all applications will be reviewed. To facilitate the review of applications, 
applicants should organize the narrative sections of their technical applications in the same order 
as the merit review criteria. Following review of the technical applications, the cost application 
of only the apparently successful applicant will be reviewed for reasonableness, realism, 
allowability, and allocability of the proposed costs. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

All applications received by the NOFO deadline stated in the Cover Letter will be reviewed first 
for eligibility, then for responsiveness, and, finally, against the merit review criteria set forth 
below. If one part of an application is received after the NOFO deadline, then the entire 
application will be considered late and may not be considered for award. Also, full applications 
that are received after the NOFO deadline will be considered late and may not be considered for 
award. Further, applications in response to this NOFO should respond directly to the terms, 
conditions, specifications, and provisions of this NOFO. Applications not conforming to this 
NOFO may be categorized as non-responsive, thereby eliminating them from further 
consideration. If an applicant takes exception to any of the terms and conditions of the NOFO, 
then USAID will consider its application to be unacceptable. Applicants who wish to take 
exception to the terms and conditions stated within this NOFO are strongly encouraged to 
contact the Agreement Officer before doing so. USAID reserves the right to change the terms 
and conditions of the NOFO by amendment at any time prior to the applicant selection decision. 

 

The Government anticipates the award of one cooperative agreement as a result of this NOFO. 
A USAID Merit Review Committee (MRC) will conduct a merit review of all applications 
received that comply with the instructions in this NOFO, and make the recommendation on 
which should be considered for award. The Agreement Officer will make the final 
determination whether the award will be made to the applicant. Award may be made with or 
without a request for clarifications/additional detail on an application. 

 

APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 


 

Technical Applications will be evaluated against the merit review criteria listed below. The 
Technical Application must include a clear description of the approach which will be taken for 
each of the program objectives detailed in this NOFO. Particular attention will be given to the 
anticipated results listed under each program objective. Applicants must address all of the 
program objectives and anticipated results listed in the NOFO. 

 

CRITERION 

 CRITERION NAME 

WEIGHT 

Criterion 1 

Technical Approach 

Criterion 1 is weighted as 
approximately equal to all other criteria 
when combined. Criteria 2 and 3 are 
equal, and each individually is greater 
than Criterion 4. 

Criterion 2 

Management & Staffing Plan 

Criterion 3 

Key Personnel 

Criterion 4 

Institutional Capacity 



 

A. Technical Evaluation Criteria 


 

The following merit review criteria will serve as the basis for USAID’s review of each 
application: 

 

Criterion 1. Technical Approach: 

 

The merit review under this factor will holistically focus on the following elements (not subfactors, 
so not assigned any particular individual weight): 

 

● The extent to which the proposed technical approach is likely to lead to achievement of 
concrete and measurable results, which indicate significant contribution to achieving the 
goal, objectives, and components of the NOFO. 


 

● The extent to which the proposed technical approach is based on an in-depth 
understanding of the Cambodian context and development challenges stated in the 
program description, and proposes innovative, flexible, feasible, and sustainable 
approaches to achieving results. 


 

● The extent to which the proposed technical approaches will ensure integration of gendersensitive 
programming and synergies with other development programs, donors and 
partners and include vulnerable populations as beneficiaries and stakeholders, 
particularly ethnic minority and indigenous populations. 


 

● The extent to which the proposed technical approaches will ensure integration of 
inclusive development programming. 


 

● The extent to which the draft Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) plan presents 
clearly defined indicators that demonstrate the program’s results and the extent to which 
the draft MEL plan demonstrates the Applicant’s approach to adaptive management 
based on learning and measurable results. 


 

Criterion 2. Management and Staffing plan: 


 

The merit review under this factor will holistically focus on the following elements (not 
sub-factors, so not assigned any particular individual weight): 

 

● The extent to which the management plan addresses key program management functions 
including administrative set up, financial management system, organizational structure, 
clearly defined roles and responsibilities of staff subject to the organizational structure 
lines of communication, and sub-awardee management (if any) or consortium of partners 
(when relevant) that maximizes efficient use of resources and links to intended results. 


 

● The extent to which the staffing plan will ensure the successful implementation of the 
proposed activities, including efficient start-up of the implementation without delay and 
interruption. 


 

● The extent to which the staffing plan and proposed sub-awards address gender 
mainstreaming, inclusive development, and localization. 


 

Criterion 3. Key Personnel: 

 

Key personnel will be evaluated on a combination of their technical qualifications 
(including relevant work experience), educational background (including relevant 
academic and non-academic training and ongoing professional development), 
communication skills, language skills, and highlighted professional competences. 

 

Criterion 4. Institutional Capacity: 

 

The extent to which the applicant demonstrates an effective ability to identify, mobilize, 
and leverage required expertise from local, regional and international pools of 
professional experts to fulfill the needs for technical assistance to ensure achievement of 
the goal and objectives of the Program Description. This includes the ability to manage 
relationships with host government ministries and other relevant health development 
partners. 

 

B. Business (Cost) Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with 
reasonable economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs 
should be included in the award. 

 


Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set 
forth in 2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing 
(Matching)" for U.S. entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a preaward 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the 
prospective recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and 
operational controls, financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in 
order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of 
the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the 
award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

 

{END OF SECTION E} 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

A notice of award signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document for this NOFO. 
The notice of award will be provided electronically to the applicant’s point of contact listed in 
the application. Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful applicants pursuant 
to ADS 303.3.7.1.b. For the successful application, USAID may reach out to the applicant with 
clarifying questions and a request for a revised application by a specified date. USAID reserves 
the right to award without requesting clarifications or additional detail on an application. 
USAID may choose to change the Applicant’s proposed award type, Grant or Cooperative 
Agreement, prior to award. 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No 
costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully 
executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

Prior to issuance of award, the applicant may be required to submit additional information on 
the organization and key individuals for vetting. For example, for those organizations that have 
not had previous grants or cooperative agreements with the US Government, Articles of 
Incorporation or other documentation which substantiates the legal character of the entity will 
be requested. In such cases, issuance of an award is contingent on the timely receipt of the 
information requested and the successful completion of the vetting process/post-award risk 
assessment. Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received funding from 
USAID will be subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, ensure adequacy 
of financial controls and establish an indirect cost rate. 

 

2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements 


 

The award will be administered according to the applicable standard provisions: 

 

U.S. organizations, ADS 303, 2 CFR 200, 2 CFR 700 (http://www.ecfr.gov/) and the Standard 
Provisions for U.S. Non- Governmental Recipients 
(http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa) are applicable. 

 

Non-U.S. organizations, ADS 303, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-Governmental 
Recipients (http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab) are applicable. 

 

Applicable OMB Circulars are available at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars_default 

 

Resulting award to Public International Organizations (PIOs, or IOs) will be administered in 
accordance with Chapter 308 of USAID’s ADS including the Standard Provisions set forth in 


72044223RFA00001 
USAID Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity II (EQHA II) 

ADS 308.5.15. ADS 308 is available at: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/308.pdf 

The award will be administered by the USAID/Cambodia’s Office of Acquisition and 
Assistance. The AO will designate an AOR to review, concur and/or approve on the items 
outlined in Substantial Involvement (Section B of this NOFO). 

3. Reporting Requirements 
The Recipient will adhere to all reporting requirements listed below; further, US Non-
Governmental organizations need to be in compliance with 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 
(specifically 2 CFR 200.327-329). All reports will be submitted by the due date for approval 
from the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The Recipient will consult with 
the AOR on the format prior to submission. In addition to the reports below, the AOR may 
request additional information to contribute to the internal USAID project reviews. 

While the overall approach will focus on the objectives noted above, reporting on results by 
each of USAID’s health program elements (i.e. TB, HIV, FP/RH, maternal and child health, 
malaria, or emerging pandemic threats), may be required based on the intervention and type of 
funding provided, in addition to overarching results. Moreover, the level of effort on individual 
technical issues must be proportional to budget streams and the budget split accordingly. The 
recipient will need to strike a careful balance between focusing on congressionally mandated 
health priorities, while at the same time contributing to a broader strengthening of health 
systems as outlined above. 

The applicants are encouraged to propose indicators and targets that are inclusive, gender-
sensitive and must disaggregate by sex for all people-level indicators. 

The Recipient will adhere to all reporting requirements listed below. All reports as required 
under Substantial Involvement shall be submitted by the due date. Additional reports requiring 
review and clearances, when necessary, are listed under each requirement. 

Annual Work Plan 

Within 60 days of agreement award, the Recipient will submit an initial work plan to the AOR 
to cover the remaining period in the current U.S. Government Fiscal Year (the period covered 
by this plan will depend on the date of the award). The work plan will be developed in 
consultation with the AOR and relevant stakeholders. The work plan will include programmatic 
targets, results metrics, and a short risk analysis. The subsequent work plans will be submitted 
annually. 

The subsequent annual Work Plans will be submitted to the AOR at least thirty (30) days before 
the beginning of the next reporting period. The work plan year will be consistent with the 
USG’s fiscal year (October-September). The Recipient will prepare the work plan in 
consultation with the AOR and relevant stakeholders. 

Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 

Page 52 of 60 


 

A draft MEL Plan must be submitted to the AOR within the first 90 days after the award is 
signed. The MEL plan will cover the entire period of the Agreement and will be revised as 
needed, and in cases of a program modification, including the addition of activities under the 
opportunity module. The plan should be aligned with, but not wholly based upon the Foreign 
Assistance Framework standard indicators. Performance metrics should capture progress 
towards the overall expected outcomes and therefore USAID/Cambodia anticipates relevant 
customized metrics to serve as a management tool in support of this program. Metrics should 
reflect, at a minimum, both output and outcome levels. Where possible, impact metrics are 
desired. Foreign Assistance Framework standard indicators are available at 
http://www.state.gov/f/indicators/index.htm The Recipient will customize or include gendersensitive 
indicators listed in the link above. The Recipient will be expected to further update and 
refine its MEL Plan to include specific indicators and targets for the achievement of program 
results as part of USAID/Cambodia’s overall Performance Management Plan (PMP). 
Importantly, the plan should inform real time learning and adapting of ideas and approaches to 
program implementation. The MEL Plan submitted by the Recipient will be subject to approval 
by the Agreement Officer Representative (AOR). 

 

Accurate and real-time monitoring is necessary so that the Activity adapts to changing 
conditions and makes mid-course corrections, as necessary. Proposed indicators, baselines and 
targets under each of the three objectives should be developed by the applicant and be submitted 
as part of the overall Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL). Activities should be 
based on measurable indicators and targets for each result. Indicators should focus on both 
capturing the results at the objective level as well as reporting individually on each technical 
area. All people-level indicators must be disaggregated by sex. Collecting gender-sensitive 
indicators (for example, standard indicator GNDR-6) and documentation of unintended genderrelated 
consequences of the activities are strongly encouraged. 

 

The MEL plan must capture various elements associated with quality improvement including 
the process of care, competent systems for improved clinical outcomes; improving patientcentered 
care (patient satisfaction, improved trust and utilization); improving quality of resource 
use (from stewardship of the system to cost-effectiveness of individual interventions); and 
improving evidence-based care, including compliance with written national guidelines. Reports 
must also capture progress toward institutionalization and efforts to develop ownership and 
commitment, as a path toward sustainability. 

 

The MEL Plan is a performance management tool for planning, managing, and documenting 
how performance data are collected and used. During the initial program planning period, the 
awardee shall work closely with USAID to develop the MEL plan using a USAID/Cambodia 
specified format. The awardee must finalize the MEL plan following review and comments by 
the AOR and resubmit for the AOR’s approval. It is to be submitted for approval within 15 days 
of receipt of USAID's comments. The approved MEL will be effective for the life of the award 
and may be revised as appropriate in collaboration with USAID and evolving requirements from 
USG, and only with prior approval, in writing, from the AOR. All indicator data submitted are 
to be supported by documentary evidence for authenticity. 

 

Key components of the Activity MEL Plan typically include: 


 

● The logical model along with the activity theory of change 
● The activity’s monitoring plan and approach, including relevant performance monitoring 
and context monitoring; 
● Beneficiary feedback plan that includes feedback collection procedures, feedback 
response procedure and reporting feedback results to USAID; 
● Evaluation plan that includes internal evaluations and assessment as well as the plan for 
collaborating with external evaluators; 
● Collaborating, Learning and Adapting plan; 
● Estimated resources needed for MEL, including monitoring, evaluation and learning 
activities 
● Roles and responsibilities for all proposed monitoring, evaluation and learning actions; 
● Data management plan; 
● Schedule of MEL Deliverables to USAID; 
● Performance Indicator Tracking Table (PITT) that includes all indicators by each 
objective/purpose and their baselines, disaggregate levels and annual target values; and, 
● Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) for each indicator included in the PITT. 


 

The awardee is expected to conduct a thorough baseline assessment and facilitate its own internal 
assessments in order to monitor performance and progress toward results. 

 

USAID plans to conduct a midterm and final evaluation of this award using an independent, 
externally contracted third-party evaluator. Evaluations will pose and seek answers to questions 
related to the purpose of the Activity focused on the extent to which the Activity has contributed 
to ensuring that Cambodian people seek and receive quality health care without financial 
hardship through a sustainable health system. 

 

Quarterly Performance Report 

 

The Recipient shall submit a Quarterly Performance Report, within 30 days after the end of each 
quarter, to include information on program activities undertaken in the reporting period. It will 
summarize progress in relation to agreed upon targets contained in the work plan, and will 
specify any problems encountered and indicate resolutions or proposed corrective actions; the 
status of activities and deliverables and the date of their completion/submission to 
USAID/Cambodia; changes to personnel; and other relevant issues. For each action, the 
Recipient will designate responsible parties and establish a timeframe for completion. Quarterly 
Performance Reports will also include an updated political economy and risk assessment and 
any recommendations for programmatic adjustments. Since this award also emphasizes women, 
ethnic minorities, as well as other marginalized populations, the report shall also address gender 
and inclusion gaps, opportunities and differential negative impacts on vulnerable populations. In 
lieu of the Quarterly Performance Report for the 4th quarter of the U.S. Government Fiscal 
Year, the Recipient will submit Annual Progress Reports. 

 

Annual Progress Reports 

 

The Annual Progress Report shall be due 30 calendar days after the end of the reporting period 
covering activities of the previous USG fiscal year. The report will provide a succinct 


presentation of achievements of program objectives and targets during the year with supporting 
discussion to explain any shortfalls. The report will summarize program progress, provide an 
analysis of program impact based on activities completed or in-progress, identify success 
stories, and suggest resolution of any outstanding issues. The Annual Progress Reports will 
include a performance indicator data table presenting the baseline, targets established for each 
fiscal year, and the actual annual performance data using indicators from the MEP Plan. 

 

Final Report 

 

Within 90 days after the completion date of this Cooperative Agreement the Recipient shall 
submit a final report which includes an executive summary of the Recipient’s accomplishments 
in achieving results and recommendations about areas in need of future assistance; an overall 
description of the recipient’s activities and attainment of results, as appropriate during the life of 
the Cooperative Agreement; an assessment of the progress made toward accomplishing the 
objective and expected results and significance of these activities; important research findings, 
comments and recommendations, and a fiscal report that describes how the recipient’s funds 
were used (see 2 CFR 200.328 Monitoring and reporting program performance.) 

 

Financial Reporting 

 

Financial reporting requirements will be in accordance with 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, which 
require quarterly completion of the Standard Form (SF) 425. These are due no later than 30 
calendar days after the end of each quarter based on the U.S. Government fiscal year. The 
instructions for completing the form can be found on: http://www.sba.gov/content/standardform-
425-federalfinancial- report. Copies of the SF-425 must also be sent to the AO and AOR. 

 

Demobilization Plan 

 

At least 120 calendar days prior to the Completion Date of the Award, the Recipient must 
submit a Demobilization Plan for the AOR’s approval. Within this plan, the Recipient must 
submit a Property Disposition Plan for the phase-out of in-country operation with regard to 
equipment and supplies (for approval by the AO) and delivery schedule for all required reports 
or deliverables along with a timetable for completing all required actions (for approval by the 
AOR). 

4. Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements 


 

The Recipient must submit development experience materials, including the final report, to the 
following address: 

 

● Online: http://dec.usaid.gov 
● By mail (for pouch delivery): 


 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

 


*Note: Mail sent to USAID via the US Postal Service undergoes security and irradiation 
processing. To send sensitive items, like CDs or DVDs, please contact the DEC team 
at ksc@usaid.gov to arrange delivery. 

 

For questions on DEC submissions, contact: M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC Telephone: +1 202-712- 
0579 Email: ksc@usaid.gov 

 

5. Program Income 


 

If the successful applicant(s) is/are a non-profit organization(s), any program income generated 
under the award(s) will be added to USAID funding (and any cost-sharing that may be provided, 
if applicable), and used for program purposes. However, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.307 Program 
Income, if the successful applicant is a for-profit or commercial organization, any program 
income generated under the award will be deducted from the U.S. Government share of this 
award to determine the amount of USAID funding. 

 

Program income will be subject to 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. NGOs or the standard provision 
entitled Program Income for non-U.S. NGOs. If the successful applicant(s) is/are a PIO, any 
program income generated under the award(s) will be added to USAID funding (and any non- 
USAID funding that may be provided) and used for program purposes. 

 

6. Environmental Compliance 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities 
are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards 
are adopted for all activities. Respondent environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this RFA. In addition, 
the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless otherwise 
directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID regulations, 
the latter shall govern. No activity funded under this Cooperative Agreement (CA) will be 
implemented unless an environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has 
been reached for that activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), 
Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by 
the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as 
“approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

 

An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) ASIA 22-119 has been approved for the Project 
funding this RFA. The IEE covers activities expected to be implemented under this CA. USAID 
has determined that a Negative Determination with conditions applies to one or more of the 
proposed activities. This indicates that if these activities are implemented subject to the 
specified conditions, they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the environment. 
The recipient shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to 


be funded under this award. 

 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Cognizant Technical Officer and Mission Environmental Officer 
or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities 
under this grant/CA to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation. If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the 
approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the 
documentation for USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken 
prior to receiving written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. Any 
ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and 
written approval is received from USAID. 

 

When the approved Regulation 216 documentation is (1) an IEE that contains one or more 
Negative Determinations with conditions and/or (2) an EA, the recipient shall: a) Unless the 
approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental mitigation and 
monitoring plan (EMMP) or a project mitigation and monitoring (M&M) plan, the recipient 
shall prepare an EMMP or M&M Plan describing how the recipient will, in specific terms, 
implement all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed project activities within the 
scope of the award. The EMMP or M&M Plan shall include monitoring the implementation of 
the conditions and their effectiveness; b) Integrate a completed EMMP or M&M Plan into the 
initial work plan; c) Integrate an EMMP or M&M Plan into subsequent Annual Work Plans, 
making any necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverse 
impacts to the environment. 

 

 

{END OF SECTION F} 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 

 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr. Francis Hall 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Cambodia 

#1 Street 96, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 

Phnom Penh, Cambodia 

Email: fhall@usaid.gov 

 

Ms. Honey Sokry 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Cambodia 

#1 Street 96, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 

Phnom Penh, Cambodia 

Email: hsokry@usaid.gov 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all organizations 
who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for additional information: 
https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, or used – in whole or in 
part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made as a 
result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have the 
right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if 
it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of 
this application.” 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ATTACHMENT 1: INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION 

Asia 22-119 


PROJECT/ACTIVITY DATA 



Project/Activity Name: 

Enhancing Quality of HealthCare II 



Geographic Location(s) (Country/Region): 

Cambodia 



Amendment (Yes/No), if Yes indicate # (1, 2...): 

No 



Implementation Start/End Dates (FY or M/D/Y): 

FY 2023 - FY 2028 



 If Amended, specify New End Date: 

no 



Solicitation/Contract/Award Number: 

TBD 



Implementing Partner(s): 

TBD 



Bureau Tracking ID: 

Asia Bureau 



Tracking ID of Related RCE/IEE (if any): 

N/A 



Tracking ID of Other, Related Analyses: 

N/A 



ORGANIZATIONAL/ADMINISTRATIVE DATA 



Implementing Operating Unit(s): 
(e.g. Mission or Bureau or Office) 

USAID/Cambodia 



 Other Affected Operating Unit(s): 

OPHE 



 Lead BEO Bureau: 

Asia Bureau 



Funding Operating Unit(s): 
(e.g. Mission or Bureau or Office) 

USAID/Cambodia 



Funding Account(s) (if available): 

n/a 



Original Funding Amount: 

 



 If Amended, specify funding amount: 

n/a 



 If Amended, specify new funding total: 

n/a 



Prepared by: 

Sopheanarith Sek 



Date Prepared: 

October 14, 2022 




ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE REVIEW DATA 



Analysis Type: 

Environmental Examination 

Deferral 



Environmental Determination(s): 

X Categorical Exclusion(s) 

X Negative Determination 
with Conditions 

 Positive 

Deferred (per 
22CFR216.3(a)(7)(iv) 



IEE Expiration Date (if different from 
implementation end date): 

December 2028 



Additional Analyses/Reporting 
Required: 

N/A 



Climate Risks Identified (#): 3 

Low 1 Moderate 2 High ______ 



Climate Risks Addressed (#): 3 

Low 1 Moderate 2 High ______ 



1.0 PROJECT/ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION 

1.1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF THE IEE 

 

The purpose of this document, in accordance with Title 22, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 
216 (22CFR216), is to provide a preliminary review of the reasonably foreseeable effects on the 
environment of the USAID intervention described herein and recommend determinations and, 
as appropriate, conditions, for these activities. Upon approval, these determinations become 
affirmed, per 22CFR216 and specified conditions become mandatory obligations of 
implementation. This IEE also documents the results of the project/activity level Climate Risk 
Management process in accordance with USAID policy (specifically, ADS 201mal). 

This IEE is a critical element of USAID’s mandatory environmental review and compliance 
process meant to achieve environmentally sound activity design and implementation. Potential 
environmental impacts should be addressed through formal environmental mitigation and 
monitoring plans (EMMPs) and/or Environmental Assessments (EAs), if needed. 

1.2 PROJECT/ACTIVITY OVERVIEW 

 

The Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity II (EQHA II) has a purpose to enhance quality, 
sustainability, and responsiveness of health services in the public and private sectors to 
maximize health outcomes among Cambodians, including vulnerable populations. EQHA II will 
advance the Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) DO 2 “Improved Health and 
Education with a focus on Vulnerable Populations”, by supporting the social and human 
development outcomes necessary for increased prosperity and resilience in the country. This 
activity will focus on improving health systems for both private and public sectors, which in turn 
will increase the sustainable quality health services delivery. This supports USAID/Cambodia’s 
strategy to shift from direct service delivery. 

 

This activity is planned to be a cooperative agreement awarded through full-and-open 
competition. The total estimated USAID contribution to the EQHA II activity is about 
of the opportunity module, which will come from FY 2022 to 
FY 2026 Global Health Program (GHP-USAID), with an initial obligation of in FY 


2022 funds. The activity will have an expected duration of 5 years, beginning on or around June 
30, 2023. 

 

To achieve this purpose, EQHA II will support the implementation of key priorities identified by 
MOH and other health stakeholders towards achieving universal health coverage, primarily 
through a focus on health systems advancements, addressing the challenges of reproductive, 
maternal, and child health and communicable disease, and making progress on the 
governance, regulation, and compliance agenda. Health systems advancements call for 
increasing acceptability and accountability of health services, particularly at the subnational 
level. EQHA II’s focus will include strengthening the health workforce, supporting effective 
governance and regulatory compliance, and using digital tools to increase effectiveness and 
efficiency of the health system. EQHA II has the following objectives: 

 

 

Objective 1: Improved evidence-based policy, guidelines, and strategies for more effective and 
efficient health service systems. 

 

The Activity will provide technical assistance and facilitate systems thinking among key 
stakeholders, including coordinating institutions and national programs/centers, to use evidence 
for policy analysis, develop joint plans or strategies for advocacy, and implementation aimed at 
improving the quality and availability of healthcare services at all levels. The Activity will support 
plans and strategies to promote the integration of national vertical programs into the mainstream 
health systems where possible. The activity will also strengthen policies of vertical programs, 
particularly for Maternal Child Health (MCH), Family Planning (FP), and Tuberculosis (TB). The 
effective implementation of set policies by the national institutions at subnational levels will 
depend significantly on the clear standards provided by the national levels. The Activity will also 
build on USAID and other donor investments in health information systems by working with 
service providers and managers in both the public and private sector to use data for more 
effective planning for continuing quality improvement. 

 

Illustrative Results: 


● Result 1.1: Policies, guidelines and strategies of national programs are coordinated and 
integrated with the Ministry of Health (MoH), and incorporate health system thinking. 


 

● Result 1.2: Policies, guidelines and strategies addressing specific program areas (such 
as MCH, FP, and TB) are improved, in line with international and country-specific best 
practices and approaches. 
● Result 1.3: Documented use of data and evidence for quality improvement, leading to 
more effective planning, monitoring and evaluation, and decision making. 


 

Objective 2: Improved individual and institutional capacity of the public and private sectors to 
implement, monitor and evaluate quality assurance according to the national standards. 

 

The Activity will build on current USAID programming, which seeks to improve national and 
local capacity to provide safe, timely, quality, and effective health services across the 
continuum of healthcare needs. The Activity will continue to build the capacity of the private 
sector, which should be better engaged, regulated, and recognized by the Royal Government 
of Cambodia/Ministry of Health (RGC/MOH). The Activity will support the implementation of 
existing and new regulations and accreditation laws in the health sector. While MOH and 


Development Partners help set up the monitoring and evaluation systems of quality of public 
health services, the Activity will focus on implementation of quality standards as well as 
strengthening monitoring and evaluation of quality compliance and recognition systems of 
private sector services. This work will target strengthening the capacity of multiple institutions 
managing licensing and accreditation, including the Hospital Services Department of Ministry of 
Health, Health Professional Councils, Provincial Health Departments, and one-window services 
at provincial and district levels. 

 

EQHA II will also support expanding professional networks in the public and private sectors 
that can foster technical exchange among healthcare professionals, and compile information as 
a technical resource center from which healthcare institutions of both sectors can refer and 
seek technical assistance or services when needed for their quality improvement efforts. 

 

Illustrative Results: 

 

● Result 2.1: Strengthened systems of national and subnational institutions to manage 
licensing and accreditation of health services. 


 

● Result 2.2: Improved capacity of health providers and managers to monitor and improve 
facility quality, self-regulate, and meet licensing and accreditation standards. 


 

● Result 2.3: Improved organization of the private sector and coordination with the public 
sector at national and subnational levels to develop and implement quality improvement 
policy and guidelines related to both providers behavior and facility quality standards. 


 

Objective 3: Improved individual and institutional capacity of subnational health systems to 
provide quality services to address emerging national program priorities. 

 

In addition to addressing cross-cutting quality improvement challenges in the public and private 
sectors, this activity will also deliver technical assistance to national vertical programs (including 
infectious diseases, reproductive, and maternal health) to strengthen vertical disease service 
delivery at public health facilities, including hospitals and health centers, and private health 
facilities and pharmacies. The interventions will apply updated global, regional and national 
guidelines using integrated approaches. The Activity may also support the introduction of 
innovative approaches that can be jointly defined by the national programs and other 
stakeholders in healthcare systems. 

 

While almost all deliveries and most postnatal visits are attended by skilled birth attendants, the 
quality of Maternal and Child Health (MCH) services should be improved to accelerate the 
reduction of maternal and newborn mortality. The proposed interventions should address the 
challenges in Emergency Obstetric and Newborn Care (EmONC) so that complications during 
and after delivery can be prevented. The proposed interventions should include innovative 
approaches to build capacity of the health care provider to manage the emergency obstetric and 
newborn care, which include on-site clinical coaching and mentoring. 

 

Further, modern contraceptive use continues to increase steadily at the rate of one percent per 
year, however the unmet need is still very high and use of traditional methods among married 
couples poses risks for unwanted pregnancy. Accessibility and availability of long-term methods 
at health facilities is still challenging, especially in remote areas where the skill of midwives is 
limited. The proposed interventions can include building the capacity of those providers to 
provide high-quality family planning services. 


 

This activity will address infectious disease challenges in Cambodia through leading 
improvements in the quality of health services and operational and policy frameworks that guide 
infectious disease programs. The proposed interventions will contribute to an increase in 
national TB case detection, and quality of diagnosis and treatment by identifying missing TB 
cases at facility levels using systematic screening and improve health facility staff capacity to 
diagnose and treat TB. These activities should focus on strengthening TB systems and service 
delivery, particularly at the health center level. With the national policy guidance from the 
National TB Program, private sector engagement in TB screening, diagnosis and treatment will 
be implemented by this Activity in selected provinces. 

 

As seen during the COVID-19 pandemic, emerging pandemic threats pose increasing risks to 
global health security and human prosperity. Population growth, climate change, increasing 
urbanization, and international travel and migration all increase the risk for emergence and 
spread of new pathogens. This activity will improve health facility practices that contribute to 
prevention, detection, and response for new zoonotic and other infectious disease threats 
towards strengthening health security and preventing the next pandemic. 

 

Illustrative Results: 

● Result 3.1: Increased capacity of the private sector health system to provide quality 
services related to family planning, MCH, TB, HIV and other diseases as appropriate. 
● Result 3.2: Improved capacity of public providers and strengthened systems to deliver 
high-quality emergency obstetric and newborn care (EmONC) services, particularly in 
rural areas. 
● Result 3.3: Improved capacity of providers and strengthened public and private sector 
systems to deliver high-quality family planning services, including long-acting reversible 
family planning and postpartum family planning. 


 

● Result 3.4: Improved capacity of public health care providers and strengthened systems 
to implement comprehensive services to screen, prevent, detect and treat TB services, 
particularly at health center level. 


 

● Result 3.5: Improved healthy facility capacity to prevent, detect and respond to 
emerging pandemic health threats. 


 

Opportunity Module: 

 

Subject fund availability, to supplement the intervention description as stated in the Results 
Framework above, USAID and the recipient may identify opportunities for improving our 
response through this mechanism to address specific health priority needs that cannot be 
precisely identified during the design process but emerge over the course of implementation. 
Applying the opportunity module(s) may also allow this Activity to expand geographic coverage 
to other provinces/districts as appropriate or expand reach within existing provinces. Subject to 
funding availability, USAID will work with the Recipient to identify priority needs and provide 
technical support by bringing national and international expertise to support interventions related 
to existing Objectives. 

 


2. ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS 

 

2.1 Justification for Categorical Exclusion 

Based on the objectives and the expected result described above, the objective 1 will fall under 
Categorical Exclusions in determining the classes of actions included in §216.2(c)(1) for which 
and Initial Environmental Examination, Environmental Assessment and Environmental Impact 
Statement generally are not required and §216.2(c)(1) (i) the actions do not affect the natural or 
physical environment. USAID/Cambodia is envisioned that the planned activities can be 
categorized into the following classes of actions that will fall under §216.2(c)(2) and are not 
subject to the procedures set forth in §216.3, except to the extent provided herein. 

 


(i) Education, technical assistance, or training programs except to the extent such programs 
include activities directly affecting the environment (such as construction of facilities, etc.); 

(ii) Controlled experimentation exclusively for the purpose of research and field evaluation which 
are confined to small areas and carefully monitored; 

(iii) Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings; 

(v) Document and information transfers; 

(viii) Programs involving nutrition, health care or population and family planning services except 
to the extent designed to include activities directly affecting the environment (such as 
construction of facilities, water supply systems, waste water treatment, etc.) 


 

(xi) Programs of maternal or child feeding conducted under Title II of Pub. L. 480; 

 Table 1: Recommended Determination for Categorical Exclusion 



Project/Activity 
and Sub-Activity 
# 

Recommended Determination for Categorical Exclusion 



X 

§216.2(c)(2)(i) Education, technical assistance, or training programs 
except to the extent such programs include activities directly affecting 
the environment (such as construction of facilities, etc.) 



X 

§216.2(c)(2)(ii) Controlled experimentation exclusively for the purpose of 
research and field evaluation which are confined to small areas and 
carefully monitored 



X 

§216.2(c)(2)(iii) Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and 
meetings 



 

§216.2(c)(iv) Projects in which USAID is a minor donor to a multi-donor 
project and there is no potential significant effects upon the environment 
of the United States, areas outside any nation's jurisdiction or 
endangered or threatened species or their critical habitat 



X 

§216.2(c)(2)(v) Document and information transfers 






 

§216.2(c)(2)(vi) Contributions to international, regional or national 
organizations by the United States which are not for the purpose of 
carrying out a specifically identifiable project or projects 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(vii) Institution building grants to research and educational 
institutions in the United States such as those provided for under section 
122(d) and Title XII of Chapter 2 of Part I of the FAA (22 USCA §§2151 
p. (b) 2220a. (1979)) 



X 

§216.2(c)(2)(viii) Programs involving nutrition, health care or population 
and family planning services except to the extent designed to include 
activities directly affecting the environment (such as construction of 
facilities, water supply systems, wastewater treatment, etc.) 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(ix) Assistance provided under a Commodity Import 
Program when, prior to approval, USAID does not have knowledge of 
the specific commodities to be financed and when the objective in 
furnishing such assistance requires neither knowledge, at the time the 
assistance is authorized, nor control, during implementation, of the 
commodities or their use in the partner country 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(ix) Assistance provided under a Commodity Import 
Program when, prior to approval, USAID does not have knowledge of 
the specific commodities to be financed and when the objective in 
furnishing such assistance requires neither knowledge, at the time the 
assistance is authorized, nor control, during implementation, of the 
commodities or their use in the partner country 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(x) Support for intermediate credit institutions when the 
objective is to assist in the capitalization of the institution or part thereof 
and when such support does not involve reservation of the right to 
review and approve individual loans made by the institution 



X 

§216.2(c)(2)(xi) Programs of maternal or child feeding conducted under 
Title II of Pub. L. 480 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(xii) Food for development programs conducted by food 
recipient countries under Title III of Pub. L. 480, when achieving USAID's 
objectives in such programs does not require knowledge of or control 
over the details of the specific activities conducted by the foreign country 
under such program 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(xiii) Matching, general support and institutional support 
grants provided to private voluntary organizations (PVOs) to assist in 
financing programs where USAID's objective in providing such financing 
does not require knowledge of or control over the details of the specific 
activities conducted by the PVO 



 

§216.2(c)(2)(xiv) Studies, projects or programs intended to develop the 
capability of recipient countries to engage in development planning, 




except to the extent designed to result in activities directly affecting the 
environment (such as construction of facilities, etc.) 





 

§216.2(c)(2)(xv) Activities that involve the application of design criteria or 
standards developed and approved by USAID 



 

2.2. The activities under review that justify Negative Determination with Conditions may 
include: 

The interventions under objective 2, objective 3 and the opportunity module will fall under 
negative determination with condition under 22CFR216.2(d)(2), an Initial Environmental 
Examination normally will not be necessary for activities within the classes described in 
§216.2(d), except when the originator of the project believes that the project will have a 
significant effect on the environment. USAID/Cambodia is envisioned that the activity will 
conduct clinical training that requires the use of some medical supplies which include syringes 
and pharmaceutical commodities. USAID/Cambodia does not anticipate that the activity will 
provide any commodities. The activity will use the commodities and supplies that are available 
in target health facilities. 

Therefore, in order to ensure that none of the activities under review mentioned above create 
adverse environmental impacts the implementing partner will prepare Environmental Review 
Checklists (ERCs), which will assist them in developing a suitable and adequate EMMP. The 
ERCs and EMMP must be approved by the AOR, in consultation with the MEO, prior to the 
commencement of activities. 

 

3. Climate Risk Management 

Cambodia has a humid tropical climate, heavily influenced by the annual monsoon season that 
typically begins in mid-May and lasts through the end of October. The dry season stretches from 
November to April, with less rain, little wind, and much lower humidity. The monsoons deliver 
approximately three-fourths of the country’s annual rainfall and are the primary contributor to the 
flood-pulse so essential to the region, especially along the central alluvial plains of the Mekong 
and Tonle Sap Rivers that comprise roughly 80 percent of the country’s landmass. 
Temperatures are generally consistent across the country, averaging 25˚ to 27˚ Celsius 
throughout most of the year, though with an average annual maximum of 38˚ Celsius in April 
and average annual minimum temperature of 17˚ Celsius in January. Rainfall varies more 
widely, with average annual rainfall as low as 1400 millimeters (mm) in the central lowlands, and 
as high as 4000 mm near the Cardamom mountains and nearby coastal areas in the southwest. 
Cambodia’s Eastern plains receive approximately 2000 to 2600 mm of rainfall annually though 
they may exceed those amounts in the mountainous areas in the Northeast within or around 
Virachey National Park. 

The USAID Cambodia Country Risk Profile 2019 identified the main climate risks include: 
agriculture, water, health, food security and ecosystems (detailed information: Climate-Risk- 
Profile-Cambodia). This Activity also focuses on education, technical assistance, training, 
research, workshops, meetings and documentation. See Table 2 for more detailed analysis. 

Consistent with ADS 201.3.4.5, if climate risk has not been adequately assessed at the strategy 
or project level, or if the risk rating was not exclusively determined to be “Low”, climate risk must 


be assessed, with plans specifying mitigation actions at the activity level. According to the 
CDCS CRM level analysis, CRM analysis findings summary relevant to this activity is listed 
below. 

● Changes to temperature and precipitation patterns could greatly impact crop production 
and processing in the agricultural sector, therefore potentially limiting economic growth. 
Additionally, migration of people from one place to another, due in part to flooding or 
drought occurrence, may broadly impact the workforce of Cambodia. Given that the 
Government of Cambodia has tried to implement measures addressing climate change 
impacts, most noticeably during recent drought and flooding events, this provides an 
opportunity through which to engage in adaptive management options. These could 
include building in opportunities for climate-smart agriculture and techniques and 
providing training and capacity building programs to incorporate climate information into 
workforce development. 
● Improving the business climate to attract investment and create jobs could also be 
adversely affected by long-term climate variability and increases in the frequency or 
intensity of natural disasters due to climate change. These impacts could result in 
reduced trade and investment due to damaged infrastructure and increased risks. 
However, this can be mitigated through support for better climate risk data availability, 
increased options for climate risk insurance, climate-sensitive trade and investment 
policies, and introduction of climate-smart production and processing technologies that 
can improve overall investment conditions. 


The Climate Risk Screening table below summarizes activity-level climate risk management, 
including programmatic components, identified risk and associated mitigation measures. Two 
“moderate” risk ratings were identified for this activity. The implementing partner will further 
identify actions and mitigation measures during the life-of-project and report back regularly to 
the COR and CIL on the status of their implementation, to enable smooth oversight and ensure 
sustainability of development objectives. 


TABLE 2. ACTIVITY CLIMATE RISK MANAGEMENT SUMMARY TABLE 



Defined or 
Anticipated 
Project 
Elements1 

Climate Risks2 

Risk 
Rating3 

How Risks are 
Addressed/Accepted4 

Opportunities to 
Strengthen Climate 
Resilience5 



Objective 1: 
Improved 
evidence-based 
policy, 
guidelines, and 
strategies for 
more effective 
and efficient 
health service 
systems 

Most activities 
for this 
objective will 
occur in Phnom 
Penh and 
provincial 
towns. 

Major floods or 
storms may 
disrupt or delay 
implementation 
of activities in 
affected areas. 

 

 

 

 

Low 

The climate-related 
risks are seasonal. The 
national or subnational 
government authorities 
can provide an alert in 
advance to the 
implementing partner 
(IP), who can 
coordinate with its 
counterparts to adjust 
the implementation 
plan with other 
alternative solutions to 
mitigate the impacts. 

With the COVID-19 
response and lessons 
learned, most provincial 
and district healthcare 
systems have received 
distance learning 
equipment and have 
adapted to using this 
technology for remote 
meetings/consultations, 
and learning. This 
capability also provides 
health care systems with 
climate resilience. 



Objective 2: 
Improved 
individual and 
institutional 
capacity of the 
public and 
private sectors 
to implement, 
monitor and 
evaluate quality 
assurance 
according to the 
national 
standards 

The activities 
implemented 
under this 
objective will 
occur mostly at 
provincial, 
district and 
health center 
levels. 

Major floods or 
storms can 
disrupt, or 
cause delay the 
implementation 
of activities in 
affected areas. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Low 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The IP will incorporate 
risk prevention and 
mitigation measures in 
their implementation 
plan. 

The IP will facilitate 
and provide technical 
assistance to 
management teams of 
hospitals, health 
centers and clinics to 
incorporate mitigation 
measures into a quality 
improvement plan. 

With COVID-19 response 
and lessons learned, 
various health facilities 
have adapted distance 
learning and remote 
meetings for technical 
assistance from higher 
levels. This can be used 
as an alternative 
approach to mitigate 
climate change impacts. 
In some other cases, the 
IP will adjust or reprioritize 
the training/coaching sites 
or times. 

 

 



1 Purpose/Sub-purpose, Area of Focus, or Activity/ Mechanism, etc. 

2 List key risks related to the project elements identified through either the strategy- or project-level climate risk 
assessment. 

3 Low/Moderate/ High 

4 Describe how risks have been addressed at the project level. If a decision has been made to accept the risk, 
briefly explain why. 

5 Describe opportunities to achieve development objectives by integrating climate resilience or mitigation 
measures. 


High 
temperatures 
may 
compromise 
maternal health, 
increase 
incidence of 
diarrhea, and 
spread 
infectious 
diseases 
quickly. 


Drought may 
adversely 
impact water 
supplies in 
some remote 
health centers. 

 

COVID-19 preparedness 
and rapid response 
systems can be built upon 
to improve surveillance 
systems for other 
communicable diseases. 

 

 

The implementation of 
service delivery grants 
(SDGs) and fixed lump 
sum from the RGC’s 
Health Equity and Quality 
Project II (H-EQIP II) will 
provide direct funding to 
hospitals and health 
centers to be used to 
improve infrastructure 
including water supply 
systems to mitigate the 
potential climate risks. 





Objective 3: 
Improved 
individual and 
institutional 
capacity of 
subnational 
health systems 
to provide 
quality services 
to address 
emerging 
national 
program 
priorities 

The activities 
implemented 
under this 
objective will 
occur primarily 
at the 
provincial, 
district and 
health center 
levels. 

Major floods or 
storms can 
disrupt, or 
cause delay the 
implementation 
of activities in 
affected areas. 

High 
temperature 
increase may 
compromise 
maternal health, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Low 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Moderate 

 

 

 

 

The IP will incorporate 
risk prevention and 
mitigation measures in 
their quality 
improvement plan. 

The IP will also 
incorporate the 
capacity strengthening 
of mitigation measures 
into a quality 
improvement plan for 
both public and private 
sectors. 

 

With the COVID-19 
response and lessons 
learned, most provincial 
and district healthcare 
systems have received 
distance learning 
equipment and have 
adapted to using this 
technology for remote 
meetings/consultations, 
and learning. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

COVID-19 preparedness 
and rapid response 
systems can be built upon 
to improve surveillance 
systems for other 




increase 
incidence of 
diarrhea, and 
spread 
infectious 
diseases 
quickly. 

Drought may 
adversely 
impact water 
supplies in 
some remote 
health centers. 

communicable diseases. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The implementation of 
service delivery grants 
(SDGs) and fixed lump 
sums from the RGC’s 
Health Equity and Quality 
Project II (H-EQIP II) will 
provide direct funding to 
hospitals and health 
centers to be used for 
improving infrastructure 
including supply systems 
to mitigate the potential 
climate risks. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Moderate 

 



 

 

The activity will incorporate climate risk management measures into the Activity MEL Plan and 
will ensure close monitoring of climate impacts among stakeholders who live near areas 
exposed or vulnerable to climate change impacts. 

 

 

4. Country and Environmental Information 


 

a) The legal requirements for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) in Cambodia are 
set out in the Law on Environmental Protection and Natural Resource Management, 
1996 (Chapter III) (EPNRM Law) and the Sub-Decree on Environmental Impact 
Assessment, 1999 (EIA Sub-Decree). There are also a number of Prakas (regulations 
promulgated by a Ministry to implement a law) on the procedures implementing the EIA 
Sub-Decree 1999: 
● Prakas on Guidelines for Conducting EIA Report (49 Ministry of Environment, 
March 2000); 
● Prakas on Determination of Service Charge for Environmental Impact 
Assessment Report Review and Follow-up and Monitoring of Project 
Implementation (No. 745, October 2000); 
● Prakas (Declaration) on General Guidelines for Conducting Initial and Full 
Environmental Impact Assessment Reports (No. 376 BRK.BST 2009); 
● Prakas on Registration of Consulting Firms for Studying and Preparing 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report (No. 215 Brk MoE 2014); 
and 
● Prakas on Establishment of the Technical Working Group for Reviewing and 
Commenting on the EIA Report (No. 063 Pr.k MoE 2014). 


 

b) There is also a Sub-Decree 146 on Economic Land Concessions (ELC), 2005, which 



requires environmental assessment of ELCs. Article 7, clause 5 of Sub-Decree 146 
states that “if the initial environmental and social impact assessment indicates a medium 
or high degree of adverse impact, arrange for the conduct of a full environmental and 
social impact assessment.” 
c) The National Forestry Law, 2002, which includes a framework for management, 
harvesting, use, development and conservation of the forests in the Kingdom of 
Cambodia. This law can be accessed at the following website: 
http://www.cambodiainvestment.gov.kh/law-on-forestry_020930.html 
d) The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, 2016, which aims to enhance 
Cambodia’s biodiversity and its ecosystem services by 2050 
e) The National Forest Program (NFP) 2010-2030 identifies nine strategic objectives, which 
are to be achieved through the implementation of six programs, each divided into 
several sub-programs 
f) Law on Nature Protection Area, February 2008 defines the framework of management, 
conservation and development of protected areas: 
http://www.cambodiainvestment.gov.kh/law-on-nature-protection-area-protected-areaslaw_
080104_080104.html 
g) Cambodia is currently preparing an Environmental Code with an EIA component. 
h) Tropical forests and the conservation of biodiversity play a fundamental role in 
sustainable development. As such The U.S. Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended by Sections 118 and 119, requires that all USAID Missions conduct a periodic 
country analysis of the conservation and sustainable use of tropical forests and 
biological diversity. These analyses can help inform project design and implementation. 
The USAID Cambodia Tropical Forestry and Biodiversity (118/119) Assessment can be 
accessed at the following website: http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnaea955.pdf 
i) The USAID Cambodia climate risk profile can be accessed at the following website: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/resources/climate-risk-profile-cambodia 


 

5.0 CONDITIONS AND MITIGATION MEASURES 

5.1 CONDITIONS 

 

The environmental determinations in this IEE are contingent upon full implementation of the 
following general implementation and monitoring requirements, as well as ADS 204 and other 
relevant requirements. 

5.1.1 During Pre-Award: 

5.1.1.1 Pre-Award Briefings: As feasible, the design team and/or the cognizant Mission 
Environmental Officer (MEO) or Climate Integration Lead (CIL) will provide a pre-award 
briefing for potential offerors on environmental compliance expectations/responsibilities 
at bidders’ conferences. 

5.1.1.2 Solicitations: The design team, in coordination with the Agreement Officer (AO), will 
ensure solicitations include environmental compliance and CRM requirements and 
evaluation criteria. AO will ensure technical and cost proposal requirements include 
approach, staffing, and budget sufficient for complying with the terms of this IEE. 

 5.1.1.3 Awards: The Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), in coordination with the AO, 
will ensure all awards and sub-awards, include environmental compliance requirements 
and monitoring of CRM in their regular Activity MEL plan. 


5.1.2 During Post-Award: 

5.1.2.1 Post-Award Briefings: The AOR and/or the cognizant environmental officer(s) (e.g., 
MEO, CIL) will provide post-award briefings for the implementing partner (IP) on 
environmental compliance responsibilities. 

5.1.2.3 Work Plans and Budgeting: The IP will ensure the integration of environmental 
compliance requirements and CRM in work plans and budgets to comply with 
requirements, including CRM implementation and monitoring, which the AOR will 
approve. 

5.1.2.4 Staffing: The IP, in coordination with the AOR, will ensure staffing capacity to implement 
environmental compliance and CRM requirements. 

5.1.2.5 Records Management: The AOR will maintain environmental and CRM compliance 
documents in the official project/activity file and upload records to the designated 
USAID environmental compliance database (ECD) system. 

5.1.2.6 Host Country Environmental Compliance: The IP will ensure compliance with applicable 
and appropriate host country environmental requirements unless otherwise directed in 
writing by USAID. However, in the case of a conflict between the host country and 
USAID requirements, the more stringent shall govern. 

5.1.2.7 Work Plan Review: The IP will ensure compliance with the IEE and the CRM 
requirement at least annually to the AOR, or when activities are added or modified. 
Activities outside of the scope of the IEE cannot be implemented until the IEE is 
amended. 

5.1.2.8 Amendment: If new activities are introduced or other changes to the scope of this IEE 
occur, an Amendment will be required, prior to the commencement of the changed 
activities. 

5.1.2.14 USAID Monitoring Oversight: The AOR or designee, with the support of the cognizant 
environmental officer(s) (e.g., MEO, Regional Environmental Advisor (REA), Bureau 
Environmental Officer (BEO)), will ensure monitoring of compliance with established 
requirements (e.g., by desktop reviews, site visits, etc.). 

5.1.2.16 Environmental Compliance Mitigation and Monitoring Plan: The AOR will ensure the IP 
develops, obtains approval for, and implements Environmental Mitigation and 
Monitoring Plans (EMMPs) that are responsive to the stipulated environmental 
compliance requirements, with the support of the MEO, CIL, and REA, BEO, as 
needed. 

5.1.2.17 Environmental Compliance Reporting: The IP will ensure inclusion of environmental 
compliance reporting in regular project/activity reports, using indicators as appropriate; 
development and submission of the Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Reports 
(EMMRs); and completion and submission of a Record of Compliance (RoC) describing 
the implementation of EMMP requirements in conjunction with the final EMMR or at the 
close of sub activities (as applicable) to the AOR. And where required by Bureaus or 
Missions, the IP will prepare a closeout plan consistent with contract documentation for 


AOR review and approval that outlines responsibilities for end-of-project operation, the 
transition of other operational responsibilities, and final EMMR with lessons learned. 

5.1.2.18 Corrective Action: When noncompliance or unforeseen impacts are identified, IPs notify 
the AOR, place a hold on activities, plan and take corrective action, and report on the 
effectiveness of corrective actions. The AOR initiates the corrective action process and 
ensures the IP completes and documents their activities, and shares a Correction 
Action Plan (CAP) with the MEO, CIL, REA, and BEO for clearance. Upon approval the 
AOR ensures the CAP and Record of Compliance is completed and uploaded to the 
ECD. 

5.2 AGENCY CONDITIONS 

 

5.2.1 Sub-contract Screening: The IP will use an Environmental Screening Tool to screen any 
sub-grant or sub-contracts to aid in the development of EMMPs and monitoring of 
potential impacts. 

5.2.2 Other Supplemental Analyses: The AOR will ensure supplemental environmental 
analyses that are called for in the IEE are completed and documented, prior to 
commencement of implementation. 

5.2.3 Compliance with human subject research requirements: The IP shall assure the AOR 
that the IP and sub-awardees, -grantees, and -contractors demonstrate completion of 
all requirements for ethics review and adequate medical monitoring of human subjects 
who participate in research trials carried out through this IEE and ensure appropriate 
records are maintained. All documentation demonstrating completion of required review 
and approval of human subject trials must be in place prior to initiating any trials and 
cover the period of performance of the trial as described in the research protocol. 

5.3 MITIGATION MEASURES 

 

USAID/Cambodia will ensure that the Implementing Partner further develops and completes the 
EMMP and/or a country- or activity-specific EMMP and Climate Risk Management and 
integrate it into the activity design and implementation plan to mitigate potential negative 
consequences of the project. 

Mitigation of COVID-19 Transmission: Cambodia is still affected by the global pandemic 
disease of COVID-19. Below are the specific mitigation measures that apply during the 
implementation phase of this project: 

1) Stay informed about ways to prevent COVID-19 transmission over the course of the activities, 
including where appropriate, training staff and beneficiaries on social distancing, PPE use, and 
disinfection. Guidance can be found from local authorities or at the following websites: 

● CDC’s Coronavirus Disease Site 

● WHO Getting your Workplace Ready for COVID-19 

● UNICEF, WHO, IRCF Key Messages and Actions for COVID-19 Prevention and Control in 
Schools 

● Asia COVID-19 PIEE 

2) Where appropriate and available, remote training and other non-face to face communications 
will be utilized when possible until the risk of infection passes. 


3) Local COVID-19 regulations on the size of gatherings and travel advisories will be followed. 

4) Staff will be offered options for teleworking and/or opting out of activities. These options will 
be provided to staff who feel that these activities may put them at higher risk of infection, 
especially those that are particularly at risk (e.g., immunocompromised, those with respiratory 
infections, older adults). See CDC’s People who Need Extra Precautions 

6.0 LIMITATIONS OF THIS INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION 

The determinations recommended in this document apply only to projects/activities and subactivities 
described herein. Other projects/activities that may arise must be documented in either 
a separate IEE, or an IEE amendment if the interventions are within the same activity or other 
type of environmental compliance document and shall be subject to an environmental analysis 
within the appropriate documents listed above. 

Other than projects/activities determined to have a Positive Threshold Determination, it is 
confirmed that the projects/activities described herein do not involve actions normally having a 
significant effect on the environment, including those described in 22CFR216.2(d). 

It is confirmed that the projects/activities described herein do not involve any actions listed 
below. Any of the following actions would require additional environmental analyses and 
environmental determinations: 

● Support project preparation, project feasibility studies, or engineering design for activities 
listed in §216.2(d)(1); 
● Affect endangered and threatened species or their critical habitats per §216.5, FAA 118, 
FAA 119; 
● Provide support to extractive industries (e.g. mining and quarrying) per FAA 117; 
● Promote timber harvesting per FAA 117 and 118; 
● Lead to new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or renovation work per §216.2(b)(1); 
● Support agro-processing or industrial enterprises per §216.1(b)(4); 
● Provide support for regulatory permitting per §216.1(b)(2); 
● Lead to privatization of industrial facilities or infrastructure with heavily polluted property per 
§216.1(b)(4); 
● Procure or use genetically engineered organisms per §216.1(b)(1); and/or 
● Assist the procurement (including payment in kind, donations, guarantees of credit) or use 
(including handling, transport, fuel for transport, storage, mixing, loading, application, cleanup 
of spray equipment, and disposal) of pesticides or activities involving procurement, 
transport, use, storage, or disposal of toxic materials. Pesticides cover all insecticides, 
fungicides, rodenticides, etc. covered under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and 
Rodenticide Act per §216.2(e) and §216.3(b). 


7.0 REVISIONS 

Per 22CFR216.3(a)(9), when ongoing programs are revised to incorporate a change in scope or 
nature, a determination will be made as to whether such change may have an environmental 
impact not previously assessed. If so, this IEE will be amended to cover the changes, as 
needed. Per ADS 204, it is the responsibility of the USAID AOR to keep the MEO/REA and BEO 
informed of any new information or changes in the activity that might require revision of this 
environmental analysis and environmental determination. 


