 

 

Issue Date: October 11, 2017 (Phnom Penh Time) 

Deadline for Question Clarifications: October 25, 2017 (11:00 am, Phnom Penh Time) 

Closing Date: November 17, 2017 (11:00 am, Phnom Penh Time) 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number: 72044218RFA00003 

 

Program Title: USAID Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified U.S. and Non-U.S. non-profit Nongovernmental 

Organizations (NGOs), for profit NGOs, private voluntary organizations (PVOs), Institutions of 

Higher Education/Universities and Nongovernmental International Organizations -- excluding all 
countries not included in Geographic Code 937, to implement a program entitled “USAID 
Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity”. The authority for the NOFO is found in the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. Please refer to the Program Description for a 
complete statement of objectives and expected results. 

 

Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received funding from USAID may 
be subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, ensure adequacy of financial 
controls, and establish an indirect cost rate. 

 

While one award is anticipated as a result of this Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), 
USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

 

For the purposes of this NOFO the term "Grant" is synonymous with "Cooperative Agreement"; 
"Grantee" is synonymous with "Recipient"; and "Grant Officer" is synonymous with "Agreement 
Officer". Eligible organizations interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read 
this funding opportunity thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application 
submission requirements and evaluation process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the website to 
ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity. It is the 
responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the entire NOFO has been received from the internet 
in its entirety and USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or 
conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the 
NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 


The successful applicant will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program 
objectives. Please read each section of the NOFO. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be 
furnished to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to 
www.grants.gov. 

 

Award will be made to the responsible applicant whose application best meets the requirements 
of this NOFO and the Merit Review Criteria contained herein. Issuance of this notice of funding 
opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government nor does it 
commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or submission of 
comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant. 
All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

 

Javier O. Castano 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition & Assistance 

USAID/Cambodia 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

Contents 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................................................................................................ 3 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................... 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ................................................................. 18 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ........................................................................... 21 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ..................................... 23 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ........................................................ 46 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION.............................. 49 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) ............................................ 56 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION ..................................................................................... 57 


 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

USAID Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

 

USAID/Cambodia seeks to achieve the purpose of improved health behaviors among 
Cambodians, in support of the Mission’s health sector goal of ensuring that Cambodians 
seek and receive quality health care with decreased financial hardship through more 
sustainable systems. The Activity will accomplish this result through two specific 
objectives: 1) strengthened public sector systems for oversight and coordination of social 
behavior change (SBC) at the national and provincial levels; and 2) improved ability of 
individuals to adopt healthy behaviors. 

 

USAID anticipates that the Activity will work primarily in the areas of maternal and child 
health (MCH), tuberculosis (TB), and malaria with attention to other health areas, such as 
family planning, nutrition, water and sanitation (WASH), or other development sectors as 
possible. 

 

II. BACKGROUND 

 

Health Context 

 

Since 2000, Cambodia has made significant progress in improving health indicators. Life 
expectancy at birth rose from 61.9 in 2000 to 71.4 years in 2012, and solid achievements 
have been made toward reaching Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6. Childhood 
mortality has decreased by more than half, from 83 deaths among children under five per 
1,000 live births in 2005 to 35 deaths among children under five per 1,000 live births in 
2014. Significant increases in deliveries attended by skilled health workers have 
contributed to dramatic reductions in maternal mortality; from 472 per 100,000 live births 
in 2005 to 170 per 100,000 live births in 2014. Malnourishment has also dropped 
significantly in Cambodia. Among children under five, there has been a 36 percent 
decrease in those too short for their age, a 41 percent fall in those too light for their height, 
and a 38 percent drop in those too light for their age between 2000 and 2014. The 
prevalence of HIV/AIDS has decreased by more than half from 1.7 percent in 1998 to 0.6 
percent in 2014, and the number of people dying from tuberculosis (TB) and living with the 
disease has been cut in half between 2004 and 2013. The number of malaria cases in 
Cambodia has fallen dramatically from almost 113,855 in 2004 to approximately 23,627 in 
2016. 

 

These results demonstrate the substantial gains Cambodia has made in improving the health 
of its people, but there is still much work to be done. The country continues to have among 
the highest maternal and child mortality rates in the region due to largely preventable and 
treatable causes, including pneumonia, diarrhea, and complications of childbirth. 
Approximately one-third of children are stunted from poor nutrition and suffer from high 


rates of anemia. An estimated 49,000 Cambodian children are living in residential care 
institutions, with one out of every two children experiencing physical violence. Gender-
based violence also appears to be increasing, particularly among specific groups, including 
female entertainment workers, young people, and transgender women. A study conducted 
by the National Institute of Statistics of the Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of 
Women’s Affairs found that 90 percent of women reported being injured by their intimate 
partners, and according to the U.N. Women’s report, “Women in Cambodia Continue to 
Face Violence (http://asiapacific.unwomen.org/en/news-and-
events/stories/2016/01/women-in-cambodia-continue-to-face-violence),” 47 percent of 
whom never sought health care. Many households, particularly in rural areas, lack adequate 
access to clean drinking water and sanitation facilities. Cambodia ranks among the world’s 
30 high-burden countries for TB; and resistance to the most cost-effective anti-malarial 
threatens the country’s progress toward malaria elimination. 

 

Focused donor investments and increased government financing for health have led to 
significant improvements in the Cambodian health system, but the system remains fragile 
and continues to face serious challenges, including substantial gaps in health knowledge 
and practices; insufficient financial resources; poor quality of care; low workforce and 
institutional capacity; and insufficient regulation. Given the World Bank’s recent 
designation of Cambodia as a lower middle-income country, donor financing is expected to 
be reduced in the next five to ten years. As a result, planning for a transition of these 
programs to Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) funding is required to ensure that key 
health gains are not lost. 

 

Cambodians face poor quality of care in both the public and private health sectors. Two-
thirds of Cambodians utilize private sector services due in part to perceptions that quality is 
higher than in the public sector, although this perception is inaccurate based on the 
November 2014 World Bank’s Cambodia’s Rural Health Markets and the Quality of Care” 
Knowledge Brief 
(http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/514181468213569828/pdf/933860BRI00P120the0Quality0of0Care.pdf) that showed healthcare providers’ competency was similarly 
poor in both the public and private sectors. The standards and quality of medical education 
and training for health professionals remain below par and produce providers who lack the 
necessary clinical knowledge or skills to deliver services effectively. SBC skills tend to be 
particularly weak given lack of emphasis in pre-service training and subsequent 
supervision. 

 

Despite the appearance of a high level of health awareness among Cambodians, there are 
notable discrepancies between what people know, what they do, and the treatment they 
seek — both in the public and the private sectors. Cambodians frequently seek treatment 
from poorly trained or unqualified providers and can receive ineffective and harmful health 
care, advice, services, and commodities, with little or no consumer rights protection. 
Delays in seeking treatment from a qualified health care provider can result in serious 
morbidity or mortality. There are myriad reasons for this, including the greater accessibility 
of informal providers, who are prepared to make house calls, at lower cost. But there are 
also psychosocial reasons as well – many have greater trust in informal providers, 


grounded in traditional belief systems and community influence. Sometimes these health 
care-seeking decisions are simply based on a lack of understanding about what constitutes 
appropriate health care and the risks of inappropriate treatment. 

 

SBC Landscape 

 

While a number of RGC and donor-supported organizations currently implement SBC 
activities, these efforts are poorly coordinated and of variable quality. Many activities also 
face persistent lack of funding, which influences both the type and quality of outputs 
produced. Insufficient investment in research, monitoring, and evaluation, in particular, 
appears to have hindered effective design or implementation of SBC, especially in the 
public sector. Both the public sector and NGOs struggle to recruit and retain well-qualified 
behavior change professionals, due to both lack of academic and training programs and 
competition from private sector marketing and advertising firms. 

 

The RGC includes a number of operating units that are involved in SBC coordination, 
design, and management, including advocacy and SBC teams within the national programs 
for HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria, and the National Maternal and Child Health Center 
(NMCHC), as well as the National Center for Health Promotion (NCHP). Coordination 
across these units is limited, due in part to the lack of a sector-wide strategic framework for 
SBC defining Ministry of Health (MOH) priorities; the roles and responsibilities of various 
public sector actors; and strategies for engagement with other organizations active in SBC 
or communication. Past investment in strengthening the capacity of the NCHP and other 
operating units active in SBC appears to have yielded gains at the provincial level, where 
coordination and information-sharing appears stronger than at the national level. 

 

A number of Cambodian NGOs and for-profit organizations are active in SBC, although it 
is not clear that they possess the depth or breadth of expertise to work independently across 
health areas using a range of approaches, or in providing technical support to the RGC. 
These organizations have been involved in a range of innovative SBC activities, which 
future SBC activities could learn from and build on, including promising media, 
community, and interpersonal communication (IPC) platforms such as the Love 9 variety 
show and community gender equity champions, for example. 

 

Communication Landscape 

 

The communication landscape is changing rapidly in Cambodia. The 2014 Cambodian 
Demographic and Heath Survey (CDHS revealed the deep penetration of television across 
age groups and in both urban and rural areas. More recent surveys, but on a smaller scale, 
point to an explosion of social media, with 96% of Cambodians owning a mobile phone, 
99% reachable via mobile phone, and as of late 2016, internet/Facebook becoming the most 
important channel through which Cambodians access information. Per the December 2016 
Asia Foundation “Mobile Phones and Internet Use in Cambodia 2016” study 
(http://asiafoundation.org/publication/mobile-phones-internet-use-cambodia-2016/), 
internet/Facebook was the most important channel for 30% of people, followed by TV 
(29%) and radio (15%). With 55% of 13-24 year olds using Facebook, the dynamic 


communication landscape offers great potential for affordable, innovative approaches to 
SBC. 

 

Levels of educational attainment are changing similarly quickly, with significant increases 
in the numbers of males and females going on to secondary school. According to the 2014 
DHS, 62 percent of males and 68 percent of females aged 15-19, and 60 percent of males 
and 58 percent of females aged 20-24 had some secondary school education, compared 
with the national averages of 23 percent of females and 29 percent of males. Levels of 
education correlate to differences in wealth and a rural/urban divide persists. 
Approximately 60 percent of rural-dwelling males and 70 percent of rural-dwelling females 
have some primary school education or less, and conversely in urban settings, almost 50 
percent of females and 60 percent of males have some secondary education or more. 
Overall literacy rates were 78 percent for adults and 92 percent for youth in 2015. 

 

Cross-Cutting Priorities 

 

Gender Equality and Female Empowerment 

 

According to an internal USAID/Cambodia-commissioned gender analysis, gender 
dynamics impact health behaviors and demand for and access to health services in a variety 
of ways in Cambodia. The analysis highlighted social norms that dictate that women should 
be shy and deferential to their male partners. This can undermine women’s capacity to 
practice healthy behaviors by limiting their belief in their decision-making capability, their 
access to leadership positions, and discourage women from advocating for their own health 
needs. Cambodian norms that expect men to be providers, strong, and ‘in control,’ and that 
position men as entitled to special privilege, are similarly pervasive in rural and urban 
Cambodia. These norms permeate the relationships men have with their partners, children, 
and other women in their lives, and may act as barriers to women’s health as well as men’s 
access to and equitable engagement in health-related activities. 

 

This gender analysis also found that “men are not as knowledgeable about health” as 
women and often do not access health care unless their condition or ailment is extremely 
severe. This behavior has serious implications for men’s health behaviors with respect to 
fertility, HIV, TB, malaria and other diseases, as well as their support for MCH. Despite 
being less well-informed on health matters, men still tend to hold the final say in health-
related decisions. 

 

Youth 

 

Adolescence and young adulthood are critical periods for establishment of social norms 
and behavioral patterns that continue into adulthood and influence health, education, and 
economic security across the lifespan. For this reason as well as the fact that youth, defined 
as people between 15 and 30 years old, account for 25% of the population (Cambodian 
DHS, 2014) and the influence they have on their current lives in addition to being the next 
generation of parents, young people remain a critical priority audience for many SBC 
interventions. Although social norms that dictate health behavior are changing, younger 


Cambodian women must still contend with attitudes from influencers and their peers that 
can negatively affect health-seeking behavior. For example, sex outside of marriage is 
considered a taboo subject and in many cases, young girls and boys do not have access to 
trusted adults with whom they can discuss sex and relationships. Health care providers are 
frequently perceived as judgmental. Despite this, positive messaging about reproductive 
health and an openness to discuss it is increasing in the media. 

 

This Activity will contribute to these cross-cutting gender and youth priorities by helping 
strengthen an enabling environment in which women and men and boys and girls can more 
easily adopt healthy behaviors and use health services, which will align well and support 
the achievement of USAID’s Gender Equality and Female Empowerment Policy. 

 

III. ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION 

 

Purpose 

 

This Activity will support the purpose described in USAID/OPHE’s new Project Appraisal 
Document (PAD), which is to ensure that Cambodians seek and receive quality health care 
with decreased financial hardship through more sustainable systems. The Activity will 
contribute to this purpose through achievement of sub-intermediate result (Sub-IR) 2.1.1 
(Improved health and child protection behaviors) and, to a lesser extent, Sub-IR 2.1.3 
(Improved quality of public and private sector health and social services), from the Country 
Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS): Improved health and child protection 
behaviors among Cambodians. The primary focus will be on improving healthy behaviors. 
The Activity will complement the relevant sub-purpose in the Project Appraisal Document 
by generating demand for quality health services. 

 

USAID envisions that, by 2023, the SBC Activity will contribute to a health system where 
Cambodian people know what quality health products and services are, where to get them, 
and how to use them. This Activity’s efforts will contribute to closing the gap between 
knowledge and practices closing, and people who are at risk of infectious diseases will seek 
care when experiencing signs or symptoms of disease and practice preventive behavior 
(e.g. sleeping under a bed net). Myths and misconceptions about health and practices will 
be addressed. The end vision will see Cambodian people with increased use of health 
services at facilities that meet RGC quality standards. By 2023, Cambodia will be home to 
a vibrant and cohesive social and behavior change community of practice comprised of: 
key RGC operating units; local NGOs and creative agencies; and private sector partners. 
These actors will collaborate to: elevate understanding of the role of SBC in health and 
development; secure funding for SBC initiatives; and design, implement, and evaluate 
targeted programs that maximize cost-benefit and development impact. 

 

The two specific objectives of the activity will focus on the following: 

 

● Supporting key RGC operating units, including the National Center for Health 
Promotion (NCHP), SBC teams within national vertical programs, and SBC-engaged 
health units at the subnational level, to better advocate for, design, manage, and 



coordinate effective SBC programming, including through engaging in strategic 
partnerships with the private sector, to enhance the reach and impact of SBC. 


 

● Improving individual’s core healthy behaviors: Achievement of the result will be 
demonstrated through measurable improvements to select health-seeking behaviors 
among priority populations targeted with a specific SBC intervention or campaign. The 
interventions will address collective and individual barriers to health behavior change, 
including those pertaining to the health system, such as perceived quality of care and 
provider bias. Barriers may be either cross-cutting or specific to one of the current focal 
program areas for this activity – MCH, TB, or malaria (with other program areas, such 
as nutrition, WASH or family planning, included as funding allows). 


 

The activity will address the following cross-cutting behavior: 

 

● Seeking and utilizing the ‘right care’ at the ‘right time’ in the ‘right place’ and a 
prioritized subset of program area-specific behaviors. Following are some illustrative 
examples: 


 

o postpartum women attending 4 postpartum care visits 
o caregivers seek prompt and appropriate treatment for children with signs of acute 
respiratory infection 
o caregivers provide appropriate care to children with diarrhea from onset of 
symptoms 
o timely care-seeking for symptoms of tuberculosis (TB) 
o condom use for dual protection 


 

Across all service-seeking behaviors, the Activity will promote and prioritize utilization of 
“quality” health services. It will also align with and complement other RGC and USAID 
quality improvement and policy activities, including the Health Equity and Quality 
Improvement Program (H-EQIP), the USAID Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity, 
and Health Policy Plus (HP+). 

 

Implementation Overview 

 

The USAID Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity will provide technical 
assistance to improve the quality and coordination of social and behavior change (SBC) 
within the Cambodian health sector. Through SBC demonstration interventions, this 
Activity will improve the coordination, design, and implementation of SBC interventions, 
as they relate to malaria, tuberculosis (TB), and maternal and child health (MCH), with 
other program areas, such as family planning, water and sanitation (WASH), or nutrition 
specific, included as funding allows. 

 

There will be two major areas of emphasis for this activity that are designed to be 
implemented in a complementary and mutually reinforcing manner, with the following 
approximate apportionment of effort: 

 


(i) Supporting key RGC operating units, including the National Center for Health 
Promotion (NCHP) and SBC teams within national vertical programs, and SBC-
engaged health units at the subnational level, to better advocate for, design, manage, 
and coordinate effective SBC programming, including through engaging in strategic 
partnerships with the private sector to enhance the reach and impact of SBC, (30% 
level of effort) and 


 

(ii) Demonstrating SBC in action to improve individual’s core healthy behaviors, (70% 
level of effort). 


 

This Activity is expected to receive funding through three main program areas included 
under the Health Category in the U.S. Foreign Assistance Framework: malaria, TB, and 
MCH (with the possibility of funding in family planning, nutrition, and WASH) (See 
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/93447.pdf for program area descriptions). As 
a result of shifting budget priorities and funding, the overall SBC Activity will need to 
prioritize specific interventions to achieve maximum impact on health status. It is expected 
that funding, and corresponding SBC demonstration activities, will address cross-cutting 
health issues as well as behaviors specific to the type of funding received. Depending on 
the source of funding, this could allow for the design of a new SBC intervention, or for an 
existing intervention to be broadened. In implementing the Activity, the apparently 
successful applicant will need to balance broader health system strengthening needs with 
USAID funding realities and adopt innovative and creative strategies to meet these 
important objectives, including ensuring that results can be measured across those program 
areas. 

 

The sequencing of activities will be important and the Activity will need to align its work 
plan closely with other activities in the health sector, to capitalize on improvements in the 
provision of healthcare services brought about by those initiatives, including H-EQIP, 
USAID Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity and HP+. When selecting demonstration 
sites, the SBC Activity will select from provinces where the USAID/Cambodia Quality 
Activity will be operating, i.e. Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Chhnang, Pailin, 
and Phnom Penhand Tbong Khmum. 

 

The applicant is expected to apply an approach for measuring impact of any SBC activities 
that is affordable and efficient, and capable of generating evidence that can inform future 
SBC activities. Activity outcomes will be measured by evaluating the capacity of key RGC 
operating units to coordinate, design, and manage SBC; and analyzing partnership activity 
and investment across the public and private sectors in support of SBC. 

 

Objectives and Expected Results 

 

Objective 1: (Illustrative level of effort - 30%) 

 

Strengthened public sector systems for oversight and coordination of SBC at the national 
and provincial levels. 

 


Expected Results: 

 

● Coordination and joint planning of SBC programming among stakeholders, including in 
partnership with the private sector, improved through development of sector-wide 
strategic framework; 
● Strengthened systems for ensuring quality and ongoing monitoring of the impact of 
SBC products and activities; and 
● Increased RGC funding for SBC as an essential element of health programming. 


 

The Activity will improve the quality and impact of SBC activities by strengthening 
processes for coordination, joint planning, ensuring quality, and monitoring impact of SBC; 
fostering partnerships with the private sector for implementing SBC; and enhancing the 
visibility of the NCHP as a leading center for SBC. 

 

The Activity will support key existing RGC operating units, including the NCHP, national 
programs for RMNCH (reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health), TB, and 
malaria, and relevant subnational units engaged in SBC, to strengthen coordination, 
planning, and quality assurance for SBC at the national and provincial levels. With moves 
towards decentralization and de-concentration and the introduction of Service Delivery 
Grants (SDGs), it is expected that more health funding will be directed toward the health 
facility level. At the 2016 Annual Health Congress, the Cambodian Minister of Health 
encouraged health facilities to apply their SDGs to outreach. As health facilities strengthen 
their position as the central connecting node for delivering health services to surrounding 
communities, they may be best placed to identify and test SBC approaches that work in 
those areas. And as health facilities take on greater responsibility for prioritizing health 
budgets, they may become a priority audience for increasing understanding of the 
importance of health promotion activities. The Activity should look for opportunities to 
work at the subnational level, particularly through existing mechanisms like the Provincial 
Health Promotion Units or Pro Health Technical Working Groups (TWGs), to ensure that 
any SBC and/or outreach activities are informed by best practice and benefit from SBC 
interventions happening elsewhere in Cambodia or internationally. 

 

Coordination across the units within the national health system working on SBC will be 
promoted through the development of a sector-wide strategic framework defining Ministry 
of Health (MOH) SBC priorities; the roles and responsibilities of various public sector 
actors; and strategies for engagement with other organizations active in SBC or 
communication. Encouraging of a creative and innovative approach to fostering social and 
behavior change, the framework will emphasize use of data to identify priority SBC 
interventions and inform strategic planning. The apparently successful applicant is 
expected to work with MOH to use a rigorous, evidence-based approach to identify where 
SBC interventions are likely to have the greatest impact on health outcomes, taking into 
consideration levels of political support at the subnational level, and opportunities to 
benefit from other ongoing activities. Most importantly, the SBC Activity will ensure that 
any field-based demonstrations are undertaken in the provinces where the Quality Activity 
is operating, to maximize synergies at the subnational level. Informed by that prioritization 
process, the strategic planning would, for each SBC intervention, define target audiences 


and priority populations through segmentation and prioritization of audiences; and identify 
key behavioral determinants and geographic targets. 

 

The applicant will seek innovative ways for the public and private sectors to collaborate on 
SBC. This may entail the following illustrative methods: integrating healthy behavior 
messaging into private sector marketing campaigns; establishing mutually beneficial 
arrangements with media outlets for further publicizing key messages; working with 
influencers, such as media personalities, to promote positive health messaging; or 
capitalizing on corporate social responsibility commitments for promoting healthy 
behaviors. 

 
The RGC’s investment in preventive care generally, and SBC specifically, is currently 
limited. Securing the level of commitment and funding required to implement high-quality 
SBC activities at scale will require a long-term, targeted advocacy strategy that starts with 
highlighting the efficiencies that can be gained by improving healthy behaviors. In the near 
term, identifying and working with health facilities that are already choosing to invest in 
health promotion offers a useful opportunity for gathering data about the cost/benefit of 
investing in SBC. Lessons learned from this project will, in the longer term, support a case 
nationally for increased financing for SBC as a cost-effective, prevention strategy. 

 

Objective 2: (Illustrative level of effort - 70%) 

 

Improved ability of individuals to adopt healthy behaviors. 

 

Expected Results: 

 

● Quality, high-priority SBC activities demonstrated by RGC in partnership with SBC 
service providers; 
● Increased self-efficacy to enact positive behaviors and reduce harmful behaviors, 
including utilization of health and social services, among priority populations; 
● Characteristics of high quality services perceived more accurately by priority 
populations; and 
● Strengthened social norms supporting positive behaviors among priority populations. 


 

In order to achieve the results associated with objective two, the Activity will support the 
RGC and SBC organizations in designing and implementing high-priority SBC 
demonstration activities, targeting a subset of behaviors selected from the strategic 
framework developed under objective one. The applicant will need to identify how to best 
harness the potential of local SBC organizations, which may include local, for-profit, 
creative agencies, and/or local NGOs engaged in SBC programming, in delivering the SBC 
interventions in conjunction with RGC. Where appropriate, the applicant/offeror will 
encourage the use of innovation in SBC programming and seek creative ways to promote 
private sector engagement in the demonstrations. 

 

SBC interventions will foster a more nuanced understanding of what constitutes ‘quality’ in 
the Cambodian health sector; dispelling common myths and misconceptions, like private 


sector operators being perceived as better than public sector providers; and challenging 
widely held, erroneous notions, like injected medicines are always more powerful than 
non-intravenous treatments, for example. This will highlight the importance of seeking and 
receiving care from registered physicians, and, once an accreditation system is in place, the 
importance of visiting accredited facilities. 

 

SBC demonstration activities will draw upon research to identify those behaviors most 
amenable to change through cost-effective, demand-side intervention, and those posited to 
have the greatest impact on health outcomes. The SBC demonstration activities will focus 
on promoting positive health-seeking behaviors and reducing harmful behaviors among 
priority populations that are either cross-cutting in their impact, or are specific to one of the 
main focal areas for this activity – MCH, malaria or TB. As a result, individuals will seek 
the “right care at the right time in the right place”. So for example, the public would know 
that TB services are only available in the public sector and a persistent cough calls for a 
visit to a public health facility. 

 

It is expected that key RGC and partner staff will be engaged in every element of activity 
design, implementation, and evaluation. This engagement will provide a formative 
opportunity for applied practice in SBC programming, laying the foundation for 
independent design and implementation of future SBC programs that can be taken to scale. 
During the design phase, the apparently successful applicant will work with the RGC to 
establish the geographic reach and target audience for each intervention. The apparently 
successful applicant is also expected to engage with target communities throughout the 
design process to ensure that SBC activities truly respond to their needs. These 
demonstration activities will test whether approaches can be replicated nationally. 

 

In designing demonstration activities, the apparently successful applicant will review work 
that has already been done in-country, as well as approaches that have been used 
successfully elsewhere, before using primary or secondary research to design a targeted 
intervention. Applicants are encouraged to engage in a structured behavioral analysis 
process that explores the behavior of interest and target audience(s) in depth in the interest 
of maximizing impact. Applicants are also expected to engage with target communities to 
ensure intervention activities are responding to their needs. The design of each SBC 
demonstration activity will need to consider how impact from each intervention can be best 
tested. This may include designating focal intervention/sentinel sites, based on factors such 
as disease-burden or demography, where more in-depth data can be gathered to inform 
national programs and policies, and to provide program element-specific results. 

 

The Activity will seek to prioritize channels and approaches that model healthy norms and 
behaviors, incorporate positive gender role models, and address the structural issues that 
curb positive health-seeking behavior among Cambodian people. 

 

Across all activities under objective two, the apparently successful applicant will support 
the RGC and other partners in applying a staged, iterative implementation approach that 
allows for continuous quality improvement and incorporation of target population 
feedback. 


 

IV. RELATIONSHIP TO COUNTRY COUNTERPARTS AND DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMS 

 

Country Partnerships 

 

The Activity will work closely with various counterparts from the MOH including the 
National Center for Health Promotion, Department of Hospital Services (DHS), Provincial 
Health Departments (PHD), Operational District Management and the Referral Hospital 
Management Team; Commune Councils; National Maternal and Child Health Center; 
Cambodia National Malaria Center; National Center for Tuberculosis and Leprosy Control 
(CENAT); National Institute for Public Health; and to a lesser extent with the National 
Center for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and STDs (NCHADS). At the subnational level, the 
Activity will prioritize working with those units that have shown an interest in health 
services promotion. The Activity will also work closely with the University of Health 
Sciences, with other Cambodian training institutes, with technical working groups within 
the MOH, and with the Sub-Technical Working Group on Public Private Partnerships, as 
well as with private sector partners who could contribute to the national SBC effort. 
Additionally, the Activity will ensure alignment with other donors’ programs, like the 
pooled funded Health Equity and Quality Improvement Program (H-EQIP): 

 

USAID Programs 

 

This activity will coordinate with current activities that will still be active when it starts on 
or about March 2018, and will build upon results achieved by those activities in their work 
to date. 

 

Current 

 

● Social Health Protection Project (SHP) provides technical assistance to establish a 
third-party monitoring and information system for managing health equity funds 
(HEFs); assists the RGC to improve national capacity and accountability to administer 
SHP programs; and strengthens community oversight of SHP HEF programs. The 
SBC Activity will ensure the NCHP and other RGC units learn from this project in 
refining community feedback systems for health and social services as a means to 
improved perceived quality. 


 

● NOURISH improves community delivery platforms to support integrated nutrition; 
generates demand for health, WASH, and agriculture practices, services, and products; 
uses the private sector to expand supply of agriculture and WASH products; and 
enhances the capacity of the RGC and civil society in integrated nutrition. The SBC 
Activity will take on board proven practices and tools developed under NOURISH as 
part of its technical assistance and knowledge management work with the RGC. 


 

● Cambodia Malaria Elimination Project (CMEP) - CMEP is designed to achieve four 
key objectives: (1) to intensify malaria elimination activities through the 



development, refinement, and evaluation of an evidence-based Model Elimination 
Package for Malaria; (2) to support high quality malaria control and prevention 
interventions in target Operational Districts (ODs) where gaps in coverage or quality 
may exist; (3) to enhance national malaria surveillance systems to detect, immediately 
notify, investigate, respond, and support monitoring and evaluation appropriate for 
malaria elimination and control activities; and (4) to build capacity of central staff, 
especially at the provincial and district level, to manage, intensify, and sustain malaria 
control and elimination efforts. The SBC Activity will explore ways to align with and 
complement CMEP’s SBC activities. 


 

● Quality Health Services (QHS) improves the services in public-sector clinics and 
hospitals to improve maternal, neonatal and child health. QHS has been active in the 
policy arena and has successfully advocated for the adoption of Health Center Safe 
Motherhood and Midwifery Coordination Alliance Team (MCAT) protocols. The SBC 
Activity will explore ways to promote the integration of SBC activities in scale-up of 
these strategies. 


 

● The Water and Sanitation Activity supports Teuk Saat (TS) 1001 in expanding 
availability of clean bottled water and promoting consistent use of clean bottled water. 
The SBC Activity will build upon this work in its support to the RGC and other 
partners for promotion of WASH-related behaviors for health. 


 

The SBC Activity will also support future activities that USAID is in the process of 
designing under its current Health Project Appraisal Document (PAD). 

 

Planned Activities 

 

● USAID Enhancing Quality of Healthcare Activity will support quality improvement of 
Cambodia’s health sector, which for the purposes of this activity is defined as 
improved effectiveness, efficiency, patient-centeredness, safety, accessibility, and 
equity of health services. The activity will achieve this goal through four objectives: 1) 
Improved policies, guidelines and standard for integrated quality assurance; 2) 
Increased efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery; 3) Strengthened preservice 
public health training; 4) Strengthened regulatory framework, implementation, and 
enforcement. Under these objectives, the activity will support the Ministry of Health, 
Provincial and District Health Departments and Commune Councils to improve the 
quality of health services through targeted technical assistance and limited 
introduction of new techniques, approaches, and technologies that improve quality of 
health services in both the public and private sector. The activity will build upon 
existing quality assurance structures and ensure that they incorporate a focus on 
USAID/Cambodia’s technical priorities (maternal and child health, family planning, 
nutrition, tuberculosis, HIV and malaria). In addition, a major focus of the activity will 
be ensuring quality of health services provided in the private sector. This will include 
strengthening licensing and regulation of service providers and monitoring of service 
quality in the private sector toward the development of an accreditation system for 
both public and private providers. The SBC Activity will also work in this domain, by 



supporting the NCHP and other RGC units to scale up application of best practices in 
creating demand for quality services among priority populations. The SBC Activity 
will collaborate closely with the Quality Activity to ensure that its respective efforts 
are complementary and not duplicative, including ensuring that any demonstration 
sites for the SBC Activity select from those provinces where the Quality Activity is 
operational. 


 

● PROTECT: A Communication Strategy to End Violence and Unnecessary Family 
Separation in Cambodia 2017-2022 partnership with UNICEF aims to enable children, 
their parents and caregivers, and communities to prevent and respond to violence and 
family separation by raising awareness on the unacceptability of all forms of violence 
and unnecessary family separation, transforming prevalent norms and attitudes that 
condone violence and promote unnecessary family separation, as well as building 
skills and self-efficacy to practice protective behaviors. The SBC Activity will work to 
ensure that its efforts reinforce but do not duplicate the PROTECT activities. 


 

● Health Policy Plus (HP+) aims to strengthen the enabling environment for equitable 
and sustainable health services, supplies and delivery systems through improving 
policy, financing, governance and advocacy at global, national and subnational levels. 
Through work across those four overarching pillars, HP+ fosters strong health sector 
responses to end preventable child and maternal deaths, reduce unmet need for family 
planning and reproductive health, and achieve an AIDS-free generation, with an 
emphasis on voluntary, rights-based programs. The SBC Activity will promote sharing 
of relevant learnings between the two activities, including any data from the SBC 
Activity that bolsters arguments for increasing health investments in prevention 
activities. In addition, this Activity will coordinate with USAID’s donor and 
multilateral partners implementing health, democracy and governance, and other 
programming. 


 

V. Alignment with the USAID/Cambodia Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

 

This Activity will support the development of SBC systems and capacity at the national 
and sub-national levels, which is critical to achievement of two of the three sub-IRs 
described in USAID/Cambodia’s CDCS: Sub-IR 2.1.1 (Improved health and child 
protection behaviors); and, to a lesser extent, Sub-IR 2.1.3 (Improved quality of public and 
private sector health and social services). Progress on these sub-IRs will contribute to 
attaining the Health PAD purpose of “Cambodian people seek and receive quality health 
care and social services with decreased financial hardship through more sustainable 
systems.” Progress toward this purpose will in turn support the achievement of USAID’s 
2014-2018 Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) Development Objective 
(DO) 2: Improved Health and Education for Vulnerable Populations. 

 

Other United States Government agencies working on health in Cambodia include the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); the Department of Defense; the Armed 
Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences; and the Naval Medical Research Unit. The 
Activity will coordinate with these agencies to ensure that activities complement rather 


than duplicate each other. 

 

VI. USAID Management 

 

The USAID/Cambodia Office of Public Health and Education will manage the technical 
aspects of the Cooperative Agreement. USAID/Cambodia will designate an Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR) who will be responsible for the day-to-day oversight of the 
Agreement and manage the overall activity. The AOR will retain substantial involvement 
for activities conducted directly under the Award. S/he will regularly meet with Activity 
senior leadership and staff to track program and activity design, implementation, progress, 
and evaluation; and conduct periodic management reviews and budgetary analysis. 

 

Achieving the Activity’s outcomes will be a process of demand-driven, iterative adaptation. 
The first twelve months (approximately) of the program will serve as an ‘inception phase’, 
allowing time for the selected recipient to coordinate the development of a strategic 
framework for health-related SBC and to begin designing demonstration activities, in 
partnership with relevant RGC authorities, and (potentially – depending on the apparently 
successful applicant’s proposed Activity structure) local partner SBC organizations and the 
public sector. Those designs will learn from previous work carried out in-country and 
approaches used successfully elsewhere, before undertaking new research to inform the 
design of a targeted intervention. During the inception phase the recipient will draft a 
detailed implementation plan with programmatic targets, results metrics, and key 
assumptions. The Activity’s priorities will be jointly agreed in consultation with the AOR. 

 

During Activity implementation, the apparently successful applicant will systematically 
monitor, on an ongoing basis, the impact of SBC demonstration activities; assess their 
relevance to the context and their potential for scale-up; and identify areas for 
improvement. The apparently successful applicant should be proactive in recommending 
programming adjustments to USAID, and be candid about approaches and activities that 
are not working. Recommended changes to the work plan should be based upon mutually 
agreed criteria between the AOR and the apparently successful applicant, determined 
during the Activity inception phase. 

 

{END OF SECTION A} 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

Subject to funding availability, USAID/Cambodia intends to provide up to $10 million in 
total USAID funding to support this program. All funding will be provided on an incremental 
basis subject to the availability of funds and successful performance. USAID reserves the 
right to change the funding amounts, cycle, and terms of the agreement as a result of 
availability of funding, U.S. Government requirements, or recipient performance. Should 
such changes occur, the recipient will be notified accordingly. 

 

USAID intends to issue one cooperative agreement resulting from this funding opportunity to 
the responsible applicant who offers the best application in response to this NOFO’s 
requirements, and that includes a calculation of costs that are reasonable and clearly 
explained. However, USAID reserve the right to: (a) reject any or all applications, (b) accept 
other than the lowest cost application, and (c) waive informalities and minor irregularities in 
applications received. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five years. The estimated start date will be 
upon the effective date of the award. 

 

3. Award Type and Substantial Involvement 


 

USAID plans to negotiate and award an assistance instrument known as a Cooperative 
Agreement with the successful applicant for this program. A Cooperative Agreement 
implies a level of “substantial involvement” by USAID. This substantial involvement 
will be through the Agreement Officer, except to the extent that the Agreement Officer 
delegates authority to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) in writing. The 
intended purpose of the substantial involvement during the award is to assist the recipient 
in achieving the supported objectives of the agreement. The anticipated substantial 
involvement elements for this award are listed below (this list does not include approvals 
required by Standard Mandatory Provisions for Non-U.S. NGOs or other applicable law, 
regulation or provision): 

 

a. Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plans: USAID requires the approval of 
implementation plans annually to ensure alignment with stated goals, milestones, and 
outputs. The implementation plan communicates how and when the Recipient will 
complete project activities and is drafted annually to describe new activities. This plan 
will be developed in partnership between the Recipient and the AOR. The AOR will 
ensure that the implementation plans fit within the scope, terms and conditions of the 
agreement. 




 

b. Approval of Specified Key Personnel: Key personnel require concurrence from the 
AOR and approval from the AO. 





 

c. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation. USAID’s involvement 
will include: 




 

(1) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the 
program will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the recipient. 
USAID may participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees 
must only deal with programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative 
matters. 

 

(2) Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards. 2 CFR 200.308 already 
requires the recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or 
contracting out of any work under an award. This is generally limited to approving 
work by a third party under the agreement. If USAID wishes to reserve any further 
approval rights for sub-awards or contracts, it must clearly spell out such Agency 
involvement in the substantial involvement provision of the agreement. 

 

(3) Approval of the recipient's monitoring and evaluation plans. 

 

(4) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the 
program description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. 

 

d. Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity 




USAID may include the statement “The AO may immediately halt a construction activity 
if identified specifications are not met.” In such cases, the AO must also attach the 
identified specifications to the award when it is being executed. Any material changes to 
the specifications must be treated as an amendment to the award. 

 

4. Title to Property 


 

Property title under the resultant agreement shall vest with the recipient in accordance with 
the requirements of 2 CFR 200.310 through 2 CFR 200.316 regarding use, accountability, 
and disposition of such property. 

 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 


 

The Authorized Geographic Code is 937 for the procurement of goods and services under the 
resulting award. Code 937 is defined as the United States, the cooperating/recipient country, 
and developing countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any 
country that is a prohibited source. 

 

6. Purpose of the Award 


 


The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is 
to transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the USAID 
Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity, which is authorized by Federal statute. 

 

The Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives 
and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of sound 
management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal 
funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms 
and conditions of the Federal award. The Recipient using its own unique combination of 
staff, facilities, and experience, has the primary responsibility for employing whatever form 
of sound organization and management techniques may be necessary in order to assure 
proper and efficient administration of the resulting award. 

 

 

{END OF SECTION B} 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

U.S. and non-U.S. organizations from the authorized geographic code may participate under 
this NFO. USAID encourages applications from potential new partners. 

 

USAID will not accept applications from individuals. All applications must be legally 
recognized organizational entities under applicable law. 

 

Potential for-profit applicants must note that USAID policy prohibits the payment of 
fee/profit to the prime Recipient under assistance instruments. Forgone profit does not 
qualify as cost-share. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received 
financial assistance from USAID. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation 
processes, internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established 
U.S. Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant(s) will be subject 
to a responsibility determination assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer 
(AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective recipient has 
the necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical 
skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and 
comply with the terms and conditions of the award. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 


 

Cost share is required for the applicant to be eligible. The proposed cost share will not be 
rated but its amount and composition will be reviewed by the selection committee for 
potential impact on the implementation and sustainability of the projects outcomes, and it 
may become a deciding factor in identifying the apparently successful application, in case 
when two or more applications are equally rated. 

 

USAID has established a minimum cost share of $429,000 for the recipient of the award. 
Such funds may be mobilized from the recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation 
donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private businesses that 
contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities at the country level. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and CAs, please see the ADS 303.3.10 and 2 CFR 200.307 
for U.S. NGOs. For non-US NGOs, all cost sharing would be subject to the Required as 
Applicable Provision “Cost Sharing” in the Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 303, 
Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental Organizations. 

 


USAID envisions the cost share, whether in-kind or cash, to be focused on media and 
communications activities, including, but not limited to, television and radio broadcasts, 
for example. However, the actual cost share expenditure plan will be discussed and 
approved in the work planning process during implementation. 

 

3. Number of Applications 


 

An Applicant may submit only one application per organization. Applicants are directed to 
review the other requirements for applications specified herein, including, but not limited to, 
Sections D and E herein. 

 

{END OF SECTION C} 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Honey Sokry 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Cambodia 

#1 Street 96, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 

Phnom Penh, Cambodia 

Email: hsokry@usaid.gov 

(with a copy to phnompenhoaa@usaid.gov) 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and any 
subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All applications must be 
submitted according to the directions regarding application submission in this NOFO and not 
necessarily to the point of contact. 

 

2. Questions and Answers: 


Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to the Agency Point of 
Contact above with a copy to phnompenhoaa@usaid.gov no later than the due date and time 
provided on the cover page. Therefore, applicants should submit all questions prior to the 
deadline listed on the cover page. 

 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on Grants.gov, 
if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be 
prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov for any 
amendments. 

 

3. Content and Form of Application Submission 


 

Applicants are expected to review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. 
Failure to do so will be at the applicant’s risk. 

 

In compliance with 5 CFR 1320, the Paperwork Reduction Act, applications (technical 
and cost) need to be submitted in electronic format only. 

 

Applications and modifications thereof must be submitted in two separate volumes 
electronically via email to Ms. Honey Sokry, Acquisition and Assistance Specialist, at 
hsokry@usaid.gov, and cc: phnompenhoaa@usaid.gov. 

 

 


Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. A complete application 
includes: (a) one complete technical application; and (b) one complete cost/business 
application. Each of these must be sent in separate emails as indicated below. 

 

Email submissions must include the following in the subject line: 

 

“Technical application under 72044218RFA00003, submitted by: [name of Applicant 
organization].” 

 

“Cost application under 72044218RFA00003, submitted by: [name of Applicant 
organization].” 

 

All applications received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness to 
the NOFO and the application format. Section E: Application Review Information addresses 
the technical review procedures for the applications. No additions or modifications will be 
accepted after the submission date. 

 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant shall be 
accompanied by evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously 
furnished to the issuing office. 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want to be disclosed to the public for any 
purpose or used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the title 
page with the following legend: 

 

“This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government 
and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose 
other than to evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this Applicant as 
a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government 
shall have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the 
resulting grant. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. 

The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers} and, 
mark each sheet of data it wished to restrict with the following legend: “Use or disclosure 
of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 

 

Applicants should retain for their records one (1) copy of the application and all enclosures 
which accompany it. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 


 


It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and 
received on time. 

 

USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion 
processes associated with electronic submissions. 

 

For an application sent by multiple emails, please indicate in the subject line of the 

email whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence 
of multiple emails (if more than one is sent) and of attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For 
example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email should have a 
subject line which says: "[organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

Our preference is that the technical application and the cost application be submitted as 
single email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application 
into a single document before sending them. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. All 
applications received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness to the 
NOFO and the application format. No addition or modifications will be accepted after the 
submission date. 

 

After you have sent your applications electronically, immediately check your own email to 
confirm that the attachments you intended to send were indeed sent. If you discover an error 
in your transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email 
or indicate in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do 
not send the same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note 
that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of USAID, nor 
does it commit USAID to pay for any costs incurred in the preparation or submission of an 
application. 

 

USAID may make an award on the basis of initial applications received, without requesting 
clarifications or additional detail on an application. Therefore, each initial application should 
contain the applicant's best terms from a cost and technical standpoint. USAID reserves the 
right, however, to obtain clarifications or additional detail on an application. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 


 

The technical application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection for 
award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The technical application should be specific, 
complete, and presented concisely. The application should demonstrate the Applicant's 
capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this program. The application 
should take into account the requirements of the program and evaluation criteria found in this 
NOFO. 

 


Technical applications must be submitted in PDF (searchable) and must not exceed 30 
single-spaced typed pages, utilizing Times New Roman 12pt font, single spaced, typed on 
standard 8½” x 11” sized paper with one-inch margins (both right and left) and each page 
numbered consecutively. Annexes are excluded from the page limitation. Applicants are 
advised that any pages exceeding the limit will not be considered for evaluation. 

 

The technical approach must clearly address the factors outlined in the evaluation criteria. 
The technical application should be specific, complete and presented concisely. The 
application should demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the objectives and goals of this program. 

 

Application Contents: The Technical Application, at a minimum, must contain the 
following (specific page limits or exclusions from the overall page limit are stated where 
applicable): 

 

a. Cover Page (not to exceed 1 page, not included in the overall page limit): 


 

The Cover Page should include the following: 

 

• Program/Project title; 
• NOFO reference number; 
• Name of organization applying for the agreement; 
• Indicate the author(s) of each section of the application; 
• Name(s) of all proposed partner(s)/sub-recipient(s) (not just principal partners); 
• Contact person, telephone number, fax number, address, and name(s) and title(s) of 
person(s) who prepared the application, and corresponding signatures; and 
• If applicable, the TIN and DUNS numbers of the applicant must also be listed on the 
cover page. 




 

b. Table of Contents (not to exceed 1 page, not included in the overall page limit) 


 

c. Acronyms List (not included in the overall page limit) 


 

d. Executive Summary (not to exceed 2 pages): Briefly describe: a) the proposed vision 
and of goals for the program and b) the managerial approach and resources that the 
applicant will bring to bear on the overall management of the program. 


 

e. Technical Approach, Management and Staffing Plan, Key Personnel, Institutional 
Capacity (not to exceed 28 pages) 


 

(1) Technical Approach 




 

The Applicant must describe how it will implement an SBC program to increase the 
practice of priority healthy behaviors and enabling social norms for improved health 
outcomes, with attention to the objectives and expected results described in this 
RFA. The technical approach should emphasize how SBC principles will be 


applied; ensuring a strong weighting of effort towards translating global best 
practices into actual on-the-ground activities, with a secondary emphasis on 
analysis and documentation of results. The Applicant must clearly and explicitly 
describe: 

 

• The proposed approach for strengthening coordination among health promotion 
actors in Cambodia and developing a shared agenda for prioritizing and 
programming investments in SBC; 
• The proposed approach for engaging both public and private sector partners and 
supporting broad application of evidence-based practices in SBC; and 
• How different SBC best practices will be integrated into the Activity in order to 
design and implement innovative and effective demonstration activities that 
improve health outcomes at demonstration sites, with particular attention to 
MCH, TB and malaria. 


 

The Applicant must include a draft monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) 
plan (Annex 1), including logical framework, highlight the logical linkages between 
intended strategies and activities to achieve the two objectives. Applicants must 
propose the most important indicators for measuring Activity results at each level of 
the results framework. The proposed indicators should be aligned with the National 
Health Strategic Plan, USAID standard and customized indicators, and the global 
health indicator reference list. A full MEL plan, including detailed indicator 
definitions, data collection plans, etc., will be required after award. 

 

(2) Management and Staffing Plan 




 

Applicants must submit a management and staffing plan, which describes the 
Applicant’s overall management approach and staffing plan. The management and 
staffing plan must specify the composition and organizational context of the entire 
implementation team, including home office support, and specify clear lines of 
supervision, accountability, decision-making, and responsibility, including 
management of subcontractors and sub-recipients. Applicants will indicate the 
number of positions, their positions, whether they will be local or expatriate hires, 
and the skills and experience they are expected to demonstrate. The use of 
international technical assistance (TA) should be limited to those whose skills are 
currently not available in-country. USAID leaves it to the applicant to determine the 
appropriateness of employing overseas and/or local hires for each specific position. 
The applicant must adequately justify the need and appropriateness for hiring each 
specific expatriate position. The plan must include an approach and timeline to 
ensure rapid and efficient start-up of operational and technical aspects of the 
Activity. Applicants must outline a clear scheme for partnerships and collaboration 
with a diverse range of actors and stakeholders, including but not limited to U.S. 
Government and Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) agencies, other bilateral 
and multilateral donors, local public/private sector partners, local government 
structures and communities. Letters of commitment from sub-partners, if 
applicable, must be included as an annex. 


 

(3) Key Personnel 




 

Applicants are requested to propose key personnel who demonstrate a balance of 
skills that will support the achievement of the SBC Activity’s objectives and results. 

 

USAID requires three key personnel positions for the implementation of this 
program: 

 

1) Chief of Party 

2) SBC technical specialist 

3) Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning specialist 

 

1. Chief of Party 


 

The COP will provide programmatic, strategic technical, and managerial 
leadership for all components of the program to ensure quality and timely 
delivery of the contract; ensure close coordination with and leverage other 
relevant initiatives of the U.S. Government, Royal Government of Cambodia, 
and other donors; oversee and be responsible for the financial and 
administrative compliance of the project including supervision, support, and 
direction to managerial and technical staff; interact directly and on a regular 
basis with the USAID/Cambodia Mission to coordinate program direction to 
ensure strategic alignment, collaborative learning, and adaptation; and develop 
external relations, in particular with the government, local NGOs, and the 
private sector. The COP should be effective working with senior government 
officials, influencing policy, and supporting policy changes based on new 
evidence or technical developments. The COP will oversee SBC technical 
matters to ensure that they align with global best practices and are adapted 
appropriately to the Cambodian context. 

 

Required qualifications: The COP must have an advanced degree (Master’s 
degree) in public health, communication, marketing, or a related field with at 
least ten years of relevant experience in international health programming, 
including at least five years of experience in senior-level management positions 
(e.g. COP, DCOP, Country Director, Project Director level, etc.) leading large 
and complex projects in developing country settings. The COP must have 
experience designing, implementing, and evaluating SBC activities. Excellent 
oral and written communication skills in English are required. 

 

A Bachelor’s degree in public health, communication, marketing, or a related 
field may be substituted for an advanced degree with at least twelve years of 
relevant experience in international health programming, including at least ten 
years of experience in senior-level management positions (e.g. COP, DCOP, 
Country Director, Project Director level, etc.) leading large and complex 
projects in developing country settings. 


 

2. SBC Technical Specialist 


 

The SBC Technical specialist will lead overall implementation efforts related to 
SBC strategies, plans and campaigns and ensure biomedical and technical 
elements of SBC program are in line with established disease prevention and 
treatment policies and strategies. S/he will have strong experience in designing 
and running a range of effective SBC interventions in collaboration with 
advertising agencies, marketing firms, and/or other creative professionals. 

 

Required qualifications: The SBC Technical specialist must have an advanced 
degree (Master’s degree) in communication, marketing, public health, or a 
related field and five years of experience working in SBC or social marketing. 
S/he must have demonstrated extensive experience in applying a range of 
behavior change theories in development programming and a demonstrated 
ability to collaborate effectively with advertising agencies, marketing firms, 
and/or other creative professionals to design effective SBC products and 
campaigns. Excellent oral and written communication skills in English and 
Khmer are required. 

 

A Bachelor’s degree in communication, marketing, public health, or a related 
field may be substituted for an advanced degree with at least seven years of 
experience working in SBC or social marketing. 

 

3. Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning specialist 


 

The Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning specialist will design and oversee the 
monitoring and evaluation framework for the program, identifying cost-
effective means to monitor the impact of SBC demonstration activities. S/he 
will support all project and partner staff in developing, training, and applying 
new and proven approaches to monitoring, learning, and quality 
assurance/continuous quality improvement. S/he will be responsible for 
designing and carrying out base- and end-line evaluations, as well as potentially 
working with local SBC organizations subcontracted to conduct specific impact 
evaluations. S/he will be responsible for ensuring that all technical, research 
inputs are strategic, consistent and coordinated, and that quality reports are 
delivered as per the indicated schedule. 

 

Required qualifications: The Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning specialist 
must have an advanced degree (Master’s degree) in public health, marketing, or 
a related field, with a minimum of six years of professional experience in 
designing and managing M&E frameworks and overseeing a team to conduct 
monitoring and evaluation activities. S/he must have excellent oral and written 
communication skills and be confident presenting complicated, technical ideas 
to a mixed audience. S/he must have knowledge of and experience using 


qualitative and quantitative research skills. Excellent oral and written 
communication skills in English are required. 

 

A Bachelor’s degree in public health, marketing, or a related field may be 
substituted for an advanced degree with at least eight years of experience 
designing and managing M&E frameworks. 

 

Applicants will indicate the names of each proposed Key Personnel candidate along 
with a brief statement of why the proposed individual is suited for the position. In 
an Annex, applicants will provide CVs and letters of commitment for each Key 
Personnel candidate. 

 

(4) Institutional Capacity 




 

The Applicant must discuss its recent and relevant technical and field experience 
and quality of performance in program or projects of similar technical content and 
scope in developing countries. The Applicant must also discuss how this experience 
is relevant to the success of the Activity specified in the Program Description. This 
section must include a discussion of capabilities and capacities of the Applicant and 
their major sub-partners to effectively and efficiently implement the activities 
required in the Program Description. 

 

Applicants must describe their experience in working collaboratively with host 
government ministries and relevant health development partners with examples of 
successes from recent and existing programs that contribute to improving healthy 
behaviors in a similar context. 

 

The Applicant must provide a response to the hypothetical scenario below 
(maximum 3 pages – not included in the 28 page limitation) and an example of an 
SBC product that the applicant has previously developed or would develop if this is 
a new organization. 

 

Hypothetical Scenario: 

 

• For the hypothetical scenario, the Applicant must describe the SBC approach 
that will most likely achieve desired behavioral objectives among priority 
audiences within the project timeframe and budget, justifying its selection based 
upon existing evidence and/or formative research activities proposed in the 
response. The Applicant will describe the roles that different project partners 
would play in response to the scenario; approaches employed for monitoring 
and quality assurance of project activities; and planned evaluations of the 
activities. 
• The applicant should describe a process that analyzes key gaps in the current 
context and design an SBC approach to respond to one (or more) of those gaps, 
which is selected based on high return on investment. 







• The SBC approach can include communication or non-communication-based 
approaches (or both), as appropriate. The design should be tailored to the media 
environment and the most appropriate channels for the target audience. 
• Applicants are encouraged to make and document any assumptions they deem 
necessary to respond to the scenario. 
• The Applicant is not required to prepare a detailed budget associated with the 
scenario, but should provide major line-item budget summaries, including cost 
categories and illustrative figures, to demonstrate distribution of total cost by 
budget category (included in the three page limit for the hypothetical scenario). 
• The proposed response to the hypothetical scenario should be evidence-based, 
likely to produce desired results, and show value for money. The response 
should reflect an understanding of the local Cambodian health and SBC 
contexts and demonstrate how the Applicant would adapt global best practices 
in Cambodia. 






 

Example of an SBC Product: 

 

• For the example of an actual SBC product previously developed by the 
applicant, the Applicant should provide copies of the actual product 
accompanied by a brief explanatory narrative (maximum 3 pages) that describes 
the design, implementation, and evaluation process. 






 

Hypothetical SBC scenario: 

 

Cambodia’s maternal and child health indicators have improved significantly in the 
past two decades. Childhood mortality has decreased by more than half, from 83 
deaths among children under five per 1,000 live births in 2005 to 35 in 2014. 
Increases in deliveries attended by skilled health workers have contributed to 
dramatic reductions in maternal mortality; from 472 per 100,000 live births in 2005 
to 170 in 2014. Malnourishment has also dropped. Among children under five, there 
has been a 36 percent decrease in those too short for their age, a 41 percent fall in 
those too light for their height, and a 38 percent drop in those too light for their age 
between 2000 and 2014. 

 

But despite these improvements, Cambodia continues to have among the highest 
maternal and child mortality rates in the region due to largely preventable and 
treatable causes, including pneumonia, diarrhea, and complications of childbirth. 
High levels of awareness notwithstanding, gaps in the practice of healthy behaviors 
persist, and even among well-educated segments of society, traditional beliefs 
influence care-giving. One such example is the postpartum traditional practice of 
‘roasting’; where fires are lit under the beds of new mothers, posing significant 
risks to the mother of dehydration, burns, and in the worst cases, death. Another 
example, no longer widely practiced, is the tradition of tying a newborn’s umbilical 
cord with material taken from bird nests, risking bacterial infection for the infant. 


The SBC Activity decides to implement an SBC demonstration activity to improve 
MCH-related healthy behaviors. It has $500,000 and a one year timeframe for the 
activity. 

 

f. Technical Application Annexes (not included in the page limits above): 


 

Annex 1: Draft Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan (maximum 5 pages) 

Annex 2: Organizational Chart and Staffing Plan Matrix 

Annex 3: Key Personnel Resumes and Letters of Commitment 

Annex 4: Visuals (process maps, visual examples of work, graphic organizers, etc.) 

 

6. Cost Application Format 


The following section describes the Cost/Business documentation that applicants must 
submit to USAID prior to award. This documentation enables an Agreement Officer (AO) to 
determine that the proposed costs are reasonable, allowable, and allocable, and make a 
positive risk assessment (meaning that the applicant possesses or has the ability to obtain the 
necessary management competence to plan and carry out the assistance program to be 
funded, and that the applicant will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability 
for funds and other assets provided by USAID). While there is no page limit for this portion, 
applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible, while providing the necessary detail 
to address the following. The cost application must cover the full period of performance 
using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Applicants must include a detailed five-year budget, with accompanying budget narratives 
for the application. The budget must provide in detail the total costs for implementation of 
the program that the organization is proposing. As specified earlier, the applicant should 
submit the Cost/Business application formatted in Word 2010 (for the budget narrative) and 
Excel 2010 or later (for the budget itself). The applicant must submit the full SF-424 series, 
which includes (web link provided below): 

 

• SF-424, Application for Federal Assistance 
• SF-424A, Budget Information – Non-construction Programs; and 
• SF-424B, Assurance – Non-construction Programs 


 

If the applicant has established a consortium or another type of legal relationship with its 
partners, the Cost/Business application must include a copy of the document that specifies 
the legal relationship between the parties. This document should include a full discussion of 
the relationship between the organizations including: identification of the lead applicant with 
whom USAID will work for purposes of Agreement administration; identification of the 
applicant responsible for accounting; discussion of how the Agreement effort will be 
allocated among the parties; and specification of the express agreement of the principals 
thereto to be held jointly and severally liable for the acts or omissions of the other. 

 


To support the proposed costs, please provide detailed budget notes/narrative for all costs 
that explain how the costs were derived as described under section (iv) of the cost application 
below. The following provides guidance on what is needed: 

 

• The breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to the costs of, if 
applicable, headquarters, regional, and/or country offices. Project management and 
administrative costs will be shared equitably across all funding sources. 
• The breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization involved in the 
program. 
• The costs associated with external, expatriate technical assistance and those associated 
with local in-country technical assistance. 
• The breakdown of any financial and in-kind contributions of all organizations involved in 
implementing this Cooperative Agreement. 
• A description of how the costs are allocated. 
• Potential contributions of non-USAID or private commercial donors to this Cooperative 
Agreement, and the composition of the proposed cost share. 
• Procurement plan for commodities (if applicable). 


 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections: 

 

i. Cover Page 
ii. SF424 Forms 
iii. Budget 
iv. Budget Narrative 
v. Evidence of Responsible the Agreement Officer can use to determine the 
Applicant 
vi. Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the Recipient 
vii. Certificate of Compliance (if applicable) 
viii. Consortium Documentation (if applicable) 


 

Cover Page: The Cost Application cover page must contain the same information as the 
Technical Application cover page. 

 

SF-424, SF-424A, and SF-424B: 

 

The budget must be submitted using Standard Form 424 which can be downloaded from the 
following web site at: http://apply07.grants.gov/apply/FormLinks?family=15 

 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in a rejection of the cost 
application. 

 

Budget: 

 

The budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2003 or later 
versions) with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, 
including itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Budget items with 


the total zero value should not be included in the budget. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to make award, and will result in a rejection of the cost application. 

 

The budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents for the prime 
applicant and each partner, at a minimum: 

 

a. Summary budget, must be inclusive of all project costs (USAID-funded and cost share), 
broken out by major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the 
applicant and each partner for the entire period of the project. 




 

b. Detailed budget, which is a detailed version of the Summary Budget. The detailed budget 
must reflect each estimated cost item, broken out. Detailed budget must include a 
breakdown by year, by budget category and budget line items for all federal funding 
(core and field support) and cost share for the entire implementation period of the project. 
Each cost must be specified. Unallowable costs and costs without a clear definition (such 
as “Miscellaneous”, “Other”, etc.) will not be accepted. 




 

The detailed budgets for the applicant and each partner must contain the following budget 
categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

• Personnel: must be separated into expatriate and local personnel and include direct 
salaries and wages only (not consultants or partners). All personnel must be proposed 
in accordance with each company’s personnel policies. Salaries for each proposed 
labor category must be expressed in an amount per work day with the corresponding 
level of effort required for each labor category (number of work days) and then 
calculated to a total cost for each cost period where the salary would be applicable. 
All rates must be proposed as unburdened daily rates exclusive of benefits and/or 
fees (if any). If applicable, the magnitude of the proposed level of effort should reflect 
the startup and close down phases of the project. 


 

The budget narrative must include as much information as possible about the 
personnel’s name, labor category, and unburdened daily rate, level of effort and 
salary escalation factors. Explain all assumptions in the budget narrative. If the 
organization has standing policies across all projects for annual salary escalations that 
exceed current inflation rates, those policies and the effective date of those policies 
must be provided with the application. The applicant must also confirm that the 
policy applies to all staff across all projects. 

 

• Fringe Benefits: if the company has a fringe benefit rate that has been approved by a 
federal agency, such rate should be used and evidence of its approval should be 
provided (i.e. a copy of the organization’s NICRA). 


 

If a fringe benefit rate has not been approved, the application should propose a rate 
and explain how the rate was determined; in this case, the narrative must include a 
detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., unemployment 


insurance, worker’s compensation, health and life insurance, retirement, FICA, etc.) 
and the costs of each, expressed in dollars and as a percentage of salaries. If leave 
and/or holidays are included in the latter, the number of work days per year must be 
prorated accordingly, to avoid the double charge. 

 

• Consultants: if the applicant and partners propose consultants, whose services are 
directly related to the project, the budget must contain a line item for each such 
consultant, using unburdened daily rates. Similar information should be provided for 
Consultants as provided for Personnel. In the budget summary, costs for Consultants 
must be included under Contractual budget category. Consulting services not part of 
the technical scope/delivery of the award (logistical support services such as audit 
services, IT support, security, etc.) must be included under Other Direct Costs. 


 

• Travel & Transportation: must be separated into international and domestic travel. 
Travel costs may include transportation, per diem, taxi transfers to/from airport, 
insurance, etc. For international travel, costs may also include visa, inoculations, 
MedEvac and DBA (when applicable). Within each category, details must be 
provided to explain the purpose of the trip, the number of trips, the mode of travel 
(airfare, train or other), the departure and arrival cities, the number of travelers, and 
the duration of the trips. Per Diem must be based on the organization’s travel policies, 
as well as align with the Department of State’s Standardized Regulations (DSSR). 
When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as 
the organization’s travel policy, and include all assumptions in the budget narrative. 


 

• Equipment: must contain a line item for each type of equipment, including 
information on estimated models, cost per unit and number of units. The budget 
narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and the basis for the estimates. 
Explain all assumptions in the budget narrative, including the proposed number of 
units and annual escalation factors (if any). 


 

• Supplies: must include a line item for each type of supply, including information on 
cost per unit and quantity. The budget narrative must include the purpose of the 
supplies and the basis for the estimates. Explain all assumptions in the budget 
narrative, including the proposed number of units and annual escalation factors (if 
any). 


 

• Contractual: specify the services or goods to be contracted out either through a sub-
contract or a sub-grant. The subcontractors’/sub-grantees’ budgets must follow the 
same format and provide similar level of details as the applicant’s budget. Contractual 
services not part of the technical scope/delivery of the award (logistical support 
services such as audit services, IT support, security, etc.) must be included under 
Other Direct Costs. Additionally, Consultant costs should be included under this 
Budget Category. The proposed funding amounts may be included as line items in the 
budget and illustrative activities. 


 

• Other Direct Costs must be separated into program costs and operational costs. 



 

- Program Costs may include meeting costs, training sessions, workshops, etc. A 
detailed cost buildup for each element must be included in a separate worksheet 
or a tab to specify the number of events and the costs per one event (such as 
facility rental, audio visual rental, meals, local travel for participants, etc.) Meals 
and local travel must not be duplicated for the applicant’s staff in travel and 
transportation, but must only cover non-applicant or non-partner employees 
attending the meetings/trainings. Explain all assumptions in the budget narrative, 
including the proposed number of units and annual escalation factors (if any). 


 

- Operational Costs may include office rent, utilities, communication, maintenance 
or service costs, costs associated with implementation of Branding and Marking 
Plan, costs for services not part of the technical scope/delivery of the award (i.e. 
logistical support services), taxes (if applicable), etc. Explain all assumptions in 
the budget narrative, including rates, quantity and annual escalation factors (if 
any). 


 

• Indirect Costs must be supported with information to substantiate the calculation of 
the indirect cost. If the applicant (and each partner, if applicable) has received one of 
the following, it must provide the document in the cost application to substantiate the 
indirect cost: 1) a letter from a cognizant U.S. Federal audit agency or a Negotiated 
Indirect Cost Agreement (NICRA); or 2) a narrative that supports how the indirect 
rates were calculated. 


 

If the prime applicant does not have a NICRA, the applicant must submit the 
following: 

 

Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public 
Accountant (CPA) documenting the review of the financial statements was performed 
in accordance with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; 
and that management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the 
financial statements in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework 
and for designing, implementing and maintaining internal control relevant to the 
preparation. The accountant must also state the he or she is not aware of any material 
modifications that should be made to the financial statements; or 

 

Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issued report documenting the audit 
was conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), 
and the financial statements are the responsibility of management. It also provides an 
opinion that the financial statements present fairly in all material respects, and the 
financial position of the company and the results of operations are in conformity with 
the applicable financial reporting framework (or issues a qualified opinion if the 
financial statements are not in conformity with the applicable financial reporting 
framework.) 

 

• Cost Share: Applicants should state the proposed amount of cost-sharing resources to 
be mobilized over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, 



and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a 
breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations 
involved in implementing the resulting Assistance award. The applicant and each 
partner proposing cost share must confirm that: 


 

- The proposed cost share contributions are not included as cost share contributions 
for any other U.S. Government (USG)-assisted program; and 


 

- Are necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient accomplishment of this 
award’s objectives. 


 

A cost analysis will be performed for the apparently successful Applicant. Budget 
information required from the apparently successful Applicant should be in enough detail to 
determine the proposed cost for the Applicant’s program to be allocable, allowable and 
reasonable. 

 

Budget Narrative 

 

The application must have an accompanying detailed budget narrative and justification that 
provides in detail the total program amount for implementation of the program your 
organization is proposing. The budget narrative should provide information regarding the 
basis of estimate for each line item, including reference to sources used to substantiate the 
cost estimate (e.g. organization's policy, payroll document, vendor quotes, etc.). 

 

A breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to the costs of, if applicable, 
headquarters, regional and/or country offices. Applicants who intend to utilize contractors or 
subrecipients should indicate the extent intended and a complete cost breakdown. Extensive 
contracts/agreement financial plans should follow the same cost format as submitted by the 
primary Applicant. A breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization, contract 
or sub/awardee involved in the program should be provided. 

 

Pursuant to 2 CFR 200 Contract means a legal instrument by which the Applicant purchases 
property or services needed to carry out the project or program under a resulting award. The 
term does not include a legal instrument when the substance of the transaction meets the 
definition of a Federal award or subaward (see § 200.92 Subaward), even if the Applicant 
considers it a contract. The Applicant must work to be performed, the risk borne by the 
contractor, the contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, the quality of its record 
of past performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar 
work. 

 

Required Certifications, Assurances, and Solicitation Provisions 

 

Applicants must complete the Certifications, Assurances, and Representations and include a 
PDF with the full application submission: 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 

 


Note: Past performance references are not required to be completed in this document since 
they are provided in the technical application. 

 

Certificate of Compliance 

 

Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your organization's systems have 
been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 

 

Consortium Documentation 

 

If the applicant has established a consortium, or other type of legal relationship with its 
partners, the Cost Application must include a copy of the legal relationship between the 
parties. The agreement should include a full discussion of the relationship between the 
applicant and partner(s), including identification of the applicant with whom USAID will 
work with for purposes of agreement administration, identity of the applicant which will have 
accounting responsibility, how agreement effort will be allocated and the express agreement 
of the principals thereto to be held jointly and severely liable for the acts or omissions of the 
other. 

 

7. Unique Entity Identifier and System for Award Management 


 

As discussed in Section C: Eligibility Information, please be advised that each applicant is 
required to: 

 

i. Be registered in the System for Award Management (SAM) before submitting its 
application; 


ii. Provide a valid DUNS number in its application; and 
iii. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all 
times during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under 
consideration by a Federal awarding agency. The Federal awarding agency may 
not make a Federal award to an applicant until the applicant has complied with all 
applicable DUNS and SAM requirements and, if an applicant has not fully 
complied with the requirements by the time the Federal awarding agency is ready 
to make a Federal award. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to register early to be eligible to apply for this NOFO. 

 

DUNS number: http://www.dnb.com/get-a-duns-number.html 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

The complete NOFO, including all the attachments, can be found and downloaded from 

http://www.grants.gov. Select “Find Grant Opportunities”, then click on “Browse by 
Agency”, and select “U.S. Agency for International Development” and search for this 


72044218RFA00003USAID Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity

NOFO. If there are problems downloading theNOFO, please contact Grants.gov Help Desk 
at 1-800-518-4726 orsupport@grants.govfor technical assistance.

Applicants must set forth full, accurate, and complete information as required by this NOFO. 
The penalty for makingfalse statements to the U.S. Government is prescribed in 18 U.S.C. 
1001. 

8.Potential Request for Additional Documentation
Upon consideration ofaward or during the negotiations leading to an award, Applicants maybe required to submit additional documentation deemed necessaryfor the Agreement Officerto make an affirmative determination of responsibility. Applicants should not submit theinformation below with their applications. The information in this section is provided so thatApplicants may becomefamiliar with additional documentation that may be requested by theAgreement Officer.

The information submitted should substantiate:

•Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable.
•Whether the organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accountingmanual and personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, 
leave, differentials, etc., submitted under this section have been reviewed and approvedby anyagency of theFederal Government, and if so, provide the name, address, and 
phone number of thecognizant reviewing official. The Applicant should provide copiesof the same.
9.Past Performance Information(Must be submitted in Microsoft Word) (no page limit)
The applicant must provide a list of all its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, orcooperativeagreements involving similar or related programs active or awarded during thepast threeyears. Only the prime applicant must provide this list. If a consortium, all 
consortium members must provide the required information. The referenceinformation forthese awards must include the performance location, award number (ifavailable), a briefdescription of the work performed, and afundingorganization point of contact list withnames, current telephone numbers and email addresses.

The applicant must provide three past performance references for itself. Past performance 
references must be forcontracts,grants, and/orcooperative agreements forrecent and 
relevant projects carriedout by the applicant.If partners are anticipated, one pastperformance reference isrequired for each proposed principal partner/sub-awardee (definedhere asany partner proposed to accomplish at least 15% of the activities, as determined bytotal budget share). Partner past performance references do not count as part of the threerequired past performances for the applicant. 

10.BrandingStrategyand Marking Plan
Page 39of 57


Applicants do not need to submit a draft Branding Strategy and Marking Plan in the 
initial applications. Under 2 CFR 700.16, USAID requires the submission of a Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan from only the apparently successful applicant. It is a Federal 
statutory and regulatory requirement that all overseas programs, projects, activities, public 
communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under an assistance 
award or sub-award must be appropriately marked with the USAID identity. More 
information on Branding Strategy and Marking Plan are available at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding/assistance.html. Please see Section F for more information on 
this plan. Only the apparently successful applicant will need to prepare a full Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan. 

 

The apparently successful applicant will follow the following provisions when preparing of 
the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan: 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and 
how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 






 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 






 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 






 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
clarifications with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 






 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 






 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 


 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 


 

i. USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as 
found on the USAID Web site at https://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless 
Section F of the NOFO or APS state that the USAID Administrator has 
approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal or tagline. 



ii. USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID 
Identity when acknowledging contributions. 
iii. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 
iv. If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant 
must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity 
for the program or project. 
v. USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity 
that competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate 
logo to consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of 
the proposed logos. Section F of the NOFO or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or 
tagline. 


 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 


 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 


 

i. Describe the main program message. 
ii. Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
iii. Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project 
to host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public 
events, and so forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the 
message, “USAID is from the American People.” 
iv. Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 


 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 


 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials 
and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly 
acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 


 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, 
the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 






 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 






 

(END OF PROVISION) 


 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and 
other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID 
logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity 
is the official marking for the Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at 
http:///www.usaid.gov/branding. Section F of the NOFO or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
clarifications with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 
the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the 
award, including: 


 

i. Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature; 
ii. Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio-visual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by 
USAID; 
iii. Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance 
or disaster relief programs; and 
iv. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 
v. Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If 
the USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to 
otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 


 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 



 

i. The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID 
Identity; 
ii. The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the 
program deliverables; 
iii. When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program 
deliverables, and where the applicant will place the marking; 
iv. What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the 
USAID Identity, and 
v. The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 


 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an 
explanation of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an 
exemption if USAID marking requirements would: 


 

i. Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and 
materials. The applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, 
Interim Result, or program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or 
state why an aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. Identify by 
category or deliverable item, examples of material for which an exemption is 
sought. 
ii. Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The 
applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as 
credible. 
iii. Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or 
audits, public service announcements, or other communications. The applicant 
must explain why each particular item or product is better positioned as host-
country government item or product. 
iv. Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking 
the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 
v. Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why 
marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
vi. Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The 
applicant must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would 
violate that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 
vii. Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 


 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness 
and will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be 
reviewed to ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the 
stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance 
plan. 



 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative 
agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 


 

(END OF PROVISION) 

 

11. Conscience Clause Implementation (Assistance) (February 2012) 


 

a. An organization, including a faith-based organization, that is otherwise eligible to receive 
funds under this agreement for HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, or care— 


 

(1) Shall not be required, as a condition of receiving such assistance— 


 

i. to endorse or utilize a multisectoral or comprehensive approach to combating 
HIV/AIDS; or 
ii. to endorse, utilize, make a referral to, become integrated with, or otherwise 
participate in any program or activity to which the organization has a religious 
or moral objection; and 


 

(2) Shall not be discriminated against in the solicitation or issuance of grants, contracts, 
or cooperative agreements for refusing to meet any requirement described in 
paragraph (a)(1) above. 


 

b. An applicant who believes that this solicitation contains provisions or requirements that 
would require it to endorse or use an approach or participate in an activity to which it has 
a religious or moral objection must so notify the cognizant Agreement Officer in 
accordance with the Mandatory Standard Provision titled “Notices” as soon as possible, 
and in any event not later than 15 calendar days before the deadline for submission of 
applications under this solicitation. The applicant must advise which activity(ies) it could 
not implement and the nature of the religious or moral objection. 


 

c. In responding to the solicitation, an applicant with a religious or moral objection may 
compete for any funding opportunity as a prime partner, or as a leader or member of a 
consortium that comes together to compete for an award. Alternatively, such applicant 
may limit its application to those activities it can undertake and must indicate in its 
submission the activity(ies) it has excluded based on religious or moral objection. The 
offeror’s proposal will be evaluated based on the activities for which a proposal is 
submitted, and will not be evaluated favorably or unfavorably due to the absence of a 
proposal addressing the activity(ies) to which it objected and which it thus omitted. In 
addition to the notification in paragraph (b) above, the applicant must meet the 
submission date provided for in the solicitation. 


 

(END OF PROVISION) 

 

12. Prohibition on Providing Federal Assistance to Entities that Require Certain Internal 
Confidentiality Agreements – Representation (May 2017) 



 

a. Definitions. 


 

“Contract” has the meaning given in 2 CFR Part 200. 

 

 “Contractor” means an entity that receives a contract as defined in 2 CFR Part 200. 

 

 “Internal confidentiality agreement or statement” means a confidentiality agreement or 
any other written statement that the recipient requires any of its employees or 
subrecipients to sign regarding nondisclosure of recipient information, except that it does 
not include confidentiality agreements arising out of civil litigation or confidentiality 
agreements that recipient employees or subrecipients sign at the behest of a Federal 
agency. 

 

 “Subaward” has the meaning given in 2 CFR Part 200. 

 

 “Subrecipient” has the meaning given in 2 CFR Part 200. 

 

b. In accordance with section 743 of Division E, Title VII, of the Consolidated and Further 
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235) and its successor provisions in 
subsequent appropriations acts (and as extended in continuing resolutions), Government 
agencies are not permitted to use funds appropriated (or otherwise made available) for 
federal assistance to a non-Federal entity that requires its employees, subrecipients, or 
contractors seeking to report waste, fraud, or abuse to sign internal confidentiality 
agreements or statements that prohibit or otherwise restrict its employees, subrecipients, 
or contractors from lawfully reporting such waste, fraud, or abuse to a designated 
investigative or law enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency 
authorized to receive such information. 


 

c. The prohibition in paragraph (b) of this provision does not contravene requirements 
applicable to Standard Form 312, (Classified Information Nondisclosure Agreement), 
Form 4414 (Sensitive Compartmented Information Nondisclosure Agreement), or any 
other form issued by a Federal department or agency governing the nondisclosure of 
classified information. 


 

d. Representation. By submission of its application, the prospective recipient represents that 
it will not require its employees, subrecipients, or contractors to sign or comply with 
internal confidentiality agreements or statements prohibiting or otherwise restricting its 
employees, subrecipients, or contractors from lawfully reporting waste, fraud, or abuse 
related to the performance of a Federal award to a designated investigative or law 
enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency authorized to receive such 
information (for example, the Agency Office of the Inspector General). 


 

(END OF PROVISION) 

 

{END OF SECTION D} 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 


 

Eligible, responsive applications will be reviewed in accordance with the merit review 
criteria, the application and submission information in Section D, and the program 
description information in Section A. Applications that do not meet the eligibility criteria will 
not be considered for award. 

 

The technical application will be reviewed in accordance with the technical merit review 
criteria set forth below. The cost application will be reviewed in accordance with the cost 
criteria set forth below. If an application is recommended for award following this review, 
technical and cost clarification questions may or may not be issued to the apparently 
successful applicant(s). 

 

Applicants should note that the technical merit review criteria serve to: (a) identify the 
significant issues which applicants should address in their applications; and (b) set the 
standard against which all applications will be reviewed. To facilitate the review of 
applications, applicants should organize the narrative sections of their technical applications 
in the same order as the merit review criteria. Following review of the technical applications, 
the cost application of only the apparently successful applicant will be reviewed for 
reasonableness, realism, allowability, and allocability of the proposed costs. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

All applications received by the NOFO deadline stated in the Cover Letter will be reviewed 
first for eligibility, then for responsiveness, and, finally, against the merit review criteria set 
forth below. If one part of an application is received after the NOFO deadline, then the entire 
application will be considered late and may not be considered for award. Also, full 
applications that are received after the NOFO deadline will be considered late and may not 
be considered for award. Further, applications in response to this NOFO should respond 
directly to the terms, conditions, specifications, and provisions of this NOFO. Applications 
not conforming to this NOFO may be categorized as non-responsive, thereby eliminating 
them from further consideration. If an applicant takes exception to any of the terms and 
conditions of the NOFO, then USAID will consider its application to be unacceptable. 
Applicants who wish to take exception to the terms and conditions stated within this NOFO 
are strongly encouraged to contact the Agreement Officer before doing so. USAID reserves 
the right to change the terms and conditions of the NOFO by amendment at any time prior to 
the applicant selection decision. 

 

The Government anticipates the award of one cooperative agreement as a result of this 
NOFO. A USAID Selection Committee (SC) will conduct a merit review of all applications 
received that comply with the instructions in this NOFO, and make the recommendation on 
which should be considered for award. The Agreement Officer will make the final 
determination whether the award will be made to the applicant. Award may be made with or 
without a request for clarifications/additional detail on an application. 


 

APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

Technical Applications will be evaluated against the merit review criteria listed below. The 
Technical Application must include a clear description of the approach which will be taken 
for each of the program objectives detailed in this NOFO. Particular attention will be given to 
the anticipated results listed under each program objective. Applicants must address all of the 
program objectives and anticipated results listed in the NOFO. 

 

CRITERION 

CRITERION NAME 

WEIGHT 

Criterion 1 

Technical Approach 

Criterion 1 is weighted as 
approximately equal to all other criteria 
when combined. Criteria 2 and 3 are 
approximately equal, and each 
individually is greater than Criterion 4. 

Criterion 2 

Management & Staffing Plan 

Criterion 3 

Key Personnel 

Criterion 4 

Institutional Capacity 



 

A. Technical Evaluation Criteria 


 

The following merit review criteria will serve as the basis for USAID’s review of each 
application: 

 

1. Criterion 1. Technical Approach: 


 

The merit review under this factor will holistically focus on the following elements 
(not sub-factors, so not assigned any particular individual weight): 

 

• The extent to which the proposed approach describes a robust process for 
strengthening coordination among health promotion actors in Cambodia through 
determining the most relevant and cost effective strategies for coordination and 
developing a shared agenda; 


 

• The extent to which the proposed approach for engaging with stakeholders is 
realistic and demonstrates an understanding of global best practices in SBC and 
the local Cambodian health and SBC contexts, with a particular focus on 
understanding the dynamics of the public and private health sectors and the 
challenges of engaging with private sector partners; 


 

• The extent to which the proposed approach addresses the project’s purpose, 
objectives, and expected results, with a balanced focus on program area-specific, 
with particular attention to MCH, TB, and Malaria, and cross cutting priorities. 


 

• The extent to which it demonstrates innovative thinking, technical know-how, and 
an understanding of the rapidly evolving science of SBC, including an ability to 
identify, design, and apply a range of global SBC best practices and strategies that 
respond to the local Cambodian health and SBC contexts. 


 


• The extent to which the draft MEL plan: presents clearly defined indicators that 
demonstrate the Activity’s results; and the extent to it demonstrates the 
Applicant’s approach to adaptive management based on learning and measurable 
results. 


 

2. Criterion 2. Management and staffing plan: 


 

The merit review under this factor will holistically focus on the following elements 
(not sub-factors, so not assigned any particular individual weight): 

 

• The extent to which the management plan addresses key program management 
functions including: administrative set up, financial management system, 
organizational structure; clearly defined roles of staff subject to the organizational 
structure lines of communication, and sub-awardee management, if any, or 
consortium of partners, when relevant, that maximizes efficient use of resources 
and links to intended results; and 


 

• The extent to which the staffing plan will ensure the successful implementation of 
the proposed activities including efficient start-up of the implementation without 
delay and interruption. 


 

3. Criterion 3. Key Personnel: 


 

The extent to which the proposed Key Personnel meet the requirements in the RFA 
and their qualifications and experience align with the technical application. 

 

4. Criterion 4. Institutional Capacity: 


 

The extent to which the applicant demonstrates capacity to perform the work of 
similar scope and size based on managerial resources, expertise, experience in 
program management, and sub-grantor capacity. This includes a review of the extent 
to which the response to the hypothetical scenario and the submitted SBC product 
demonstrate an understanding of the current global evidence base for SBC, as well as 
a mastery of best practices in SBC programming. 

 

B. Cost Evaluation 


 

The cost application of the apparently successful technical application will be evaluated 
for cost reasonableness, allowableness and allocability. The cost application must be 
complete with adequate budget detail and must be consistent with elements of the 
technical application. USAID will assess whether the overall costs are realistic for the 
work to be performed, whether the costs reflect that the Applicant understands the 
requirements, and whether the costs are consistent with the technical application. 

 

 

{END OF SECTION E} 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

A notice of award signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document for this 
NOFO. The notice of award will be provided electronically to the applicant’s point of contact 
listed in the application. Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful 
applicants pursuant to ADS 303.3.7.1.b. For the successful application, USAID may reach 
out to the applicant with clarifying questions and a request for a revised application by a 
specified date. USAID reserves the right to award without requesting clarifications or 
additional detail on an application. USAID may choose to change the Applicant’s proposed 
award type, Grant or Cooperative Agreement, prior to award. 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated, and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are 
hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is 
the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public 
funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of 
either a fully executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement 
Officer. 

 

Prior to issuance of award, the applicant may be required to submit additional information on 
the organization and key individuals for vetting. For example, for those organizations that 
have not had previous grants or cooperative agreements with the US Government, Articles of 
Incorporation or other documentation which substantiates the legal character of the entity 
will be requested. In such cases, issuance of an award is contingent on the timely receipt of 
the information requested and the successful completion of the vetting process/post-award 
risk assessment. Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received 
funding from USAID will be subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, 
ensure adequacy of financial controls and establish an indirect cost rate. 

 

2. Administrative and National Policy Requirements 


 

The award will be administered according to the applicable standard provisions: 

 

U.S. organizations, 2 CFR 200, 2 CFR 700 (http://www.ecfr.gov/) and the Standard 
Provisions for U.S. Non- Governmental Recipients 
(http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa) are applicable 

 

Non-U.S. organizations, the Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-Governmental Recipients 
(http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab) are applicable. 

 

Applicable OMB Circulars are available at: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars_default 

 


Resulting award to Public International Organizations (PIOs, or IOs) will be administered in 
accordance with Chapter 308 of USAID’s ADS including the Standard Provisions set forth in 
ADS 308.5.15. ADS 308 is available at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/308.pdf 

 

The award will be administered by the USAID/Cambodia’s Office of Acquisition and 
Assistance. The AO will designate an AOR to review, concur and/or approve on the items 
outlined in Substantial Involvement (Section B of this NOFO). 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

The Recipient will adhere to all reporting requirements listed below; further, US Non- 
Governmental organizations need to be in compliance with 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 
(specifically 2 CFR 200.327-329). All reports will be submitted by the due date for approval 
from the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The Recipient will consult 
with the AOR on the format prior to submission. In addition to the reports below, the AOR 
may request additional information to contribute to the internal USAID project reviews. 

 

The applicants are encouraged to propose indicators and targets that are gender sensitive and 
must disaggregate by sex for all people-level indicators. 

 

Applications must include a results framework clearly showing how sets of core indicators 
track progress under each result and reflect overall impact. Applications must also include 
and budget for plans to establish baselines. The Recipient will adhere to all reporting 
requirements listed below. All reports as required under Substantial Involvement shall be 
submitted by the due date. Additional reports requiring review and clearances, when 
necessary, are listed under each requirement. 

 

Annual Work Plan 

 

Within 60 days of award, the Recipient will submit an initial work plan to the AOR to cover 
the remaining period in the current U.S. Government Fiscal Year (the period covered by this 
plan will depend on the date of the award). The work plan will be developed in consultation 
with relevant stakeholders. The work plan will include programmatic targets, results metrics, 
and a short risk analysis. The subsequent work plans will be submitted annually. 

 

The subsequent annual Work Plans will be submitted to the AOR at least thirty (30) days 
before the beginning of the next reporting period. The work plan year will be consistent with 
the USG’s fiscal year (October-September). The Recipient will prepare the work plan in 
consultation with the relevant stakeholders. 

 

Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 

 

A draft MEL Plan must be submitted to the AOR within the first 90 days after the award is 
signed. The MEL Plan will cover the entire period of the Agreement and will be revised as 
needed, and in cases of a program modification. The plan should be aligned with, but not 


72044218RFA00003USAID Cambodia Social and Behavior Change Activity

wholly based upon the Foreign AssistanceFramework standard indicators. Performancemetrics should capture progress towards the overall expected outcomes andtherefore 
USAID/Cambodia anticipates relevant customized metrics to serve as a management tool insupport of this program. Metrics should reflect, at a minimum, both outputand outcomelevels. Where possible, impact metrics are desired. Foreign Assistance Framework standard 
indicatorsare available athttp://www.state.gov/f/indicators/index.htmThe Recipient will 
customize or include gender-sensitive indicators listed in the link above. The Recipient will 
be expected to further update and refine its MELPlan to include specific indicators and 
targets for theachievement of program results as part of USAID/Cambodia’s overallPerformance Management Plan (PMP). Importantly, the plan should inform real timelearning and adapting ofideas and approaches to program implementation. The MEL Plan 
submitted by the Recipient will be subject to approval by theAOR.

Accurate andreal-time monitoring is necessary sothat the Activity adapts to changingconditions and makes mid-coursecorrections, as necessary. Proposed indicators and targetsunder each of the twoobjectives should be developed by theRecipientand be submitted aspart of the overall MELPlan. Activities should be based on measurable indicators and targetsfor each result. Indicators should focus on both capturing the results at theobjectivelevel aswell as reporting individually on each of the technical areas. All people-level indicators must 
be disaggregated by sex. Collectinggender-sensitive indicators (for example, standard 
indicator GNDR-6)and documentation of unintended gender-related consequences of theactivities are strongly encouraged.

The MELPlanis a performance management tool for planning, managing, and documentinghow performancedata are collected and used. During the initial program planning period, theawardee shall work closely with USAID to develop the MEL plan usingaUSAID/Cambodiaspecified format. The awardee must finalize the MEL planfollowingreview and commentsby the AOR and resubmit for the AOR’s approval. It is to be submitted forapproval within 
90days of the award date. The approved MELPlanwill be effective for the life ofthe awardand may be revised as appropriate in collaboration with USAIDand evolving requirementsfrom USG, and only with prior approval, in writing, from the AOR. All indicator datasubmitted are to be supported bydocumentary evidence for authenticity.

Key componentsoftheActivity MEL Plan typically include: 

•The activity’s monitoring approach, includingrelevant performance indicators ofactivity outputs and outcomes;
•Any proposed internal evaluations;
•Learning activities, including knowledge capturedat activity close out; 
•Estimated resources for these monitoring, evaluation and learning activities that are apart of therecipient’sbudget; and 
•Roles and responsibilities for all proposed monitoring, evaluation and learningactions.
•Performance Indicator Tracking Table (PITT) that includes all indicators byeachobjective/purpose and their baselines, disaggregate levels and annual target values;
and,
Page 51of 57


• Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) for each indicator included in the 
PITT. 
• The awardee is expected to conduct a thorough baseline assessment and facilitate its 
own internal assessments in order to monitor performance and progress toward 
results. 


 

USAID plans to conduct a midterm and final evaluation of this award using an independent, 
externally contracted third-party evaluator. Evaluations will pose and seek answers to 
questions related to the purpose of the Activity focused on the extent to which the Activity 
has contributed to ensuring that Cambodian people seek and receive quality health care 
without financial hardship through a sustainable health system. 

 

Quarterly Performance Report 

 

The Recipient shall submit a Quarterly Performance Report to include information on 
program activities undertaken in the reporting period. It will summarize progress in relation 
to agreed-upon targets contained in the work plan, and will specify any problems 
encountered and indicate resolutions or proposed corrective actions; the status of activities 
and deliverables and the date of their completion/submission to USAID/Cambodia; changes 
to personnel; and other relevant issues. For each action, the Recipient will designate 
responsible parties and establish a timeframe for completion. Quarterly Performance Reports 
will also include an updated political economy and risk assessment and any 
recommendations for programmatic adjustments. Since this award also emphasizes women 
and youth, as well as other marginalized populations, the report shall also address gender 
gaps, opportunities and differential negative impacts on women, men, youth, and other key 
populations. In lieu of the Quarterly Performance Report for the 4th quarter of the U.S. 
Government Fiscal Year, the Recipient will submit an Annual Progress Report. 

 

Annual Progress Reports 

 

The Annual Progress Report shall be due 90 calendar days after the end of the reporting 
period covering activities of the previous USG fiscal year. The report will provide a succinct 
presentation of achievements of program objectives and targets during the year with 
supporting discussion to explain any shortfalls. The report will summarize program progress, 
provide an analysis of program impact based on activities completed or in-progress, identify 
success stories, and suggest resolution of any outstanding issues. The Annual Progress 
Reports will include performance indicator data table presenting the baseline, targets 
established for each fiscal year, and the actual annual performance data using indicators from 
the MEL Plan. 

 

Final Report 

 

Within 90 days after the completion date of this Cooperative Agreement the Recipient shall 
submit a final report which includes an executive summary of the Recipient’s 
accomplishments in achieving results and recommendations about areas in need of future 
assistance; an overall description of the recipient’s activities and attainment of results, as 


appropriate during the life of the Cooperative Agreement; an assessment of the progress 
made toward accomplishing the objective and expected results and significance of these 
activities; important research findings, comments and recommendations, and a fiscal report 
that describes how the recipient’s funds were used (see 2 CFR 200.328 Monitoring and 
reporting program performance.) 

 

Financial Reporting 

 

Financial reporting requirements will be in accordance with 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, 
which require quarterly completion of the Standard Form (SF) 425. These are due no later 
than 30 calendar days after the end of each quarter based on the U.S. Government fiscal year. 
The instructions for completing the form can be found on: https://www.gsa.gov/forms-
library/federal-financial-report. Copies of the SF-425 must also be sent to the AO and AOR. 

 

Demobilization Plan 

 

At least 120 calendar days prior to the Completion Date of the Award, the Recipient must 
submit a Demobilization Plan for the AOR’s approval. Within this plan, the Recipient must 
submit a Property Disposition Plan for the phase-out of in-country operation with regard to 
equipment and supplies (for approval by the AO) and delivery schedule for all required 
reports or deliverables along with a timetable for completing all required actions (for 
approval by the AOR). 

 

4. Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements 


 

The Recipient must submit development experience materials, including the final report, 
to the following address: 

 

• Online: http://dec.usaid.gov 
• By mail (for pouch delivery): 


 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

 

*Note: Mail sent to USAID via the US Postal Service undergoes security and irradiation 
processing. To send sensitive items, like CDs or DVDs, please contact the DEC team 
at ksc@usaid.gov to arrange delivery. 

 

For questions on DEC submissions, contact: M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC Telephone: +1 202-
712-0579 Email: ksc@usaid.gov 

 

5. Program Income 


 

If the successful applicant is a non-profit organization(s), any program income generated 


under the award will be added to USAID funding (and any cost-sharing that may be 
provided, if applicable), and used for program purposes. However, pursuant to 2 CFR 
200.307 Program Income, if the successful applicant is a for-profit or commercial 
organization, any program income generated under the award will be deducted from the U.S. 
Government share of this award to determine the amount of USAID funding. 

 

Program income will be subject to 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. NGOs or the standard provision 
entitled Program Income for non-U.S. NGOs. If the successful applicant(s) is/are a PIO, any 
program income generated under the award(s) will be added to USAID funding (and any 
non-USAID funding that may be provided) and used for program purposes. 

 

6. Branding and Marking 


 

Under 2 CFR 700.16, the recipient will comply with USAID branding and marking 
requirements contained in ADS 303, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental 
Organizations and ADS 320, Branding and Marking. More information on Branding Strategy 
and Marking Plan are available at http://www.usaid.gov/branding/assistance.html. The 
recipient will follow the approved Branding Strategy and Marking Plan that is incorporated 
in the award. 

 

Malaria-specific activities will also comply with Presidential Malaria Initiative branding 
guidance described under Section 5.2 Presidential Initiatives of USAID’s Graphics Standards 
Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide. 

 

7. Environmental Compliance 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development 
programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s 
Automated Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 
(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), which, in part, require that the potential 
environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to 
proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 
Respondents’ environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures 
are specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and 
USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under this cooperative agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau 
Environmental Officer (BEO). 


 

An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) of the USAID/Cambodia’s overall health 
program has been approved and it covers this project. An approved Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE) ASIA 17-074 is attached to this notice for reference. USAID determined 
that a categorical exclusion applies to the proposed activities. During annual work planning 
the recipient should monitor activities to ensure the award and associated activities 
incorporate environmentally sound principles in implementation, and adhere to this 
determination of a categorical exclusion. 

 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer and Mission Environmental Officer or 
Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities 
under this cooperative agreement to determine if they are within the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 

 

If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for 
USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving 
written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

 

 

 

{END OF SECTION F} 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

Point of Contact Information: 

 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr. Javier O. Castano 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Cambodia 

#1 Street 96, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 

Phnom Penh, Cambodia 

Email: jcastano@usaid.gov 

 

Ms. Honey Sokry 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Cambodia 

#1 Street 96, Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 

Phnom Penh, Cambodia 

Email: hsokry@usaid.gov 

 

General Email: phnompenhoaa@usaid.gov 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

 

• ATTACHMENT 1: INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 
PROJECT/ACTIVITY DATA: 

Asia 17-074 

Activity Name: Cambodia Health Project, 2017-2023 

 

Country/region: Cambodia 

 

Start Date: 5/31/2017 End Date: 6/30/2023 

 

Life of Project Amount ($): USD $164,621,012 

 

IEE Prepared by: Lisa K. Walker Date: 7/24/2017 

 

Amendment: no 

 

 

ENVIRONMENTAL ACTION RECOMMENDED: (Place X where applicable) 

 

Categorical Exclusion: 

[ X ] 

Negative Determination with Conditions: 

[ X ] 

Positive Determination: 

 

 

Purpose and Scope 

[ ] 

Deferral: 

[ ] 



 

The purpose of this document, in accordance with Title 22, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 
216 (22CFR216), is to provide a preliminary review of the reasonably foreseeable effects on the 
environment, as well as recommended Threshold Decisions, for the activities detailed below. 

This document provides a brief statement of the factual basis for Threshold Decisions as to 
whether an Environmental Assessment or an Environmental Impact Statement is required for the 
activities managed under the scope of this document. 

 

The activities detailed in this IEE include both those that will continue under existing 
implementing mechanisms and those that will be newly designed and procured. This IEE 
replaces and supersedes the previous umbrella IEE (ASIA 14-141), approved August 28, 2014 
and found at: http://gemini.info.usaid.gov/repository/pdf/41476.pdf. 


Implementing Mechanisms covered in this IEE include: 

 

Activity Name 

Total budget amount in 
Health PAD 

Dates 

Recommended 
Threshold Decisions 

Support to the Social Health 
Protection Project in Cambodia 

$400,000 

Mar 6, 2016 - 

Mar 5, 2019 

Categorical Exclusion 

Health Information Policy and 
Advocacy Program (HIPA) 

$1,500,000 

Mar 6, 2014 – 

June 5, 2018 

Categorical Exclusion 

Social Health Protection Project 
(SHP) 

$3,900,000 

December 26, 

2013 – 

December 25, 

2018 

Categorical Exclusion 

HIV Innovate and Evaluate 
Project 

$400,000 

August 30, 

2013 – March 

1, 2018 

Categorical Exclusion 

HIV Flagship 

$4,000,000 

November 14, 

2012 - 

November 13, 

2017 

Categorical Exclusion 
Negative 
Determination with 
Conditions 

Empowering Communities for 
Health Program (ECH) 

$2,861,382 

October 1, 2014 

– March 30, 

2018 

Categorical Exclusion 

Quality Health Services 

$4,233,828 

January 17, 

2014 - January 

16, 2019 

Categorical Exclusion 
Negative 
Determination with 
Conditions 

Cambodia Malaria Elimination 
Project (CMEP) 

$16,543,857 

October 26, 

2016 - October 

25, 2021 

Categorical Exclusion 
Negative 
Determination with 
Conditions 

Quality Improvement 

$25,323,326 

Planned January 
2018 – 

December 2022 

Categorical Exclusion 

Social and Behavior Change 
(SBC) 

$11,463,105 

Planned March 
2018 – March 

2023 

Categorical Exclusion 

Subtotal of total budget of 
mechanisms covered in this IEE 

$70,625,498 

 

 

Subtotal cost of mechanisms not 
covered by this IEE (because 
they are field support or 
centrally-funded mechanisms 
covered under separate IEEs) 

$69,901,457 

 

 




 

Costs for Program administration 
and oversight (A&O) and 
Program development and 
learning (PD&L) 

$24,094,057 

 

 

Budget total for entire 
Cambodia Health Project, 
2017-2023 

 

$164,621,012 

 

 



 

The activities under review are recommended for the threshold decisions indicated above in the 
table and the “Environmental Action Recommended” section. 

 

1.1Description of Activities 

 

The Office of Public Health and Education will build on USAID/Cambodia’s previous 
experiences and comparative advantages in health and child protection programming, and the 
new Project will fall within its manageable interest. The project will support the Royal 
Government of Cambodia’s (RGC) Third Health Strategic Plan (HSP3) goals. 

 

Where feasible, the project team will take an integrated approach to improving health status 
rather than targeted interventions for specific disease entities, and will work at a more strategic 
level, instead of the current focus on service delivery. Many of the interventions will be of a 
policy nature (such as regulation, national policies, health and child protection), and work done 
at the national level will have broad impact across the country. Sub-national activities align with 
the National Committee for Sub-national Democratic Development’s three year Implementation 
Plan, Phase 2, and will include capacity strengthening in provinces, districts, and communes to 
ensure quality of care and implementation of activities; to better address the technical and 
financial aspects of Decentralization and De-concentration as they relate to health and child 
protection; and to better serve communities and consumers of health and social services and 
products, particularly the poor, near poor, and vulnerable populations. 

 

The purpose of the Health Project is: Cambodian people seek and receive quality health care and 
social services with decreased financial hardship through more sustainable systems. To attain this 
purpose, the Project will improve health and child protection behaviors, improve health financing 
and social protection, and improve the quality of public and private health and social 
services. 

 

Sub-Purpose 1: Improved health and child protection behaviors 

Although Cambodia has done well in improving life expectancy and health indicators, including 
attaining its established Millennium Development Goals ahead of schedule, there are important 
challenges in bringing about the change envisioned in this Project. Despite the appearance of a 
high level of health awareness, there are notable discrepancies between what people know, what 
they do, and the treatment they seek — both in the public and the private sectors. Cambodians 


frequently seek treatment from poorly trained or unqualified providers and can receive 
ineffective and harmful health care, advice, services, and commodities, with little or no 
consumer rights protection. Delays in seeking treatment from a qualified health care provider can 
result in serious morbidity or mortality. 

 

Illustrative Project interventions include: 

 

 Strengthening local capacity for evidence-based advocacy by building skills and 
addressing biases that present barriers to health care and social services; 
 Developing and testing methods and tools to change provider and caregiver behavior; 
 Applying innovative approaches for models of influences for positive health and social 
behavior changes, especially to reach youth, populations at risk, and underserved 
populations such as migrants and Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, and/or Intersex 
(LGBTI); 
 Strengthening citizen advocacy and demand for quality health and child protection 
services; 
 Engaging the private sector to extend the reach of SBC interventions; 
 Providing technical assistance to the RGC to reform/introduce and implement laws and 
policies for clients and consumer rights and protection; and 
 Addressing the key drivers that place children in residential care through SBC activities. 






 

Sub-Purpose 2: Improved health financing and social health protection 

 

USAID/Cambodia has made important contributions toward establishing social health protection 
(SHP) for the poor and vulnerable through the Health Equity Funds system (HEF), a major 
achievement for which Cambodia has received international recognition. This form of SHP is an 
important foundation for universal health coverage (UHC), which the RGC is committed to 
supporting, whereby all of the population has access to quality services without financial 
hardship. Improved financial protection for health is designed to support the RGC and its partners 
in moving toward UHC in a sustainable manner that reduces financial barriers to quality health 
care and catastrophic financial hardships due to medical expenses. 

 

Illustrative Project interventions include: 

 

● Supporting the RGC to develop and implement a robust SHP legal and governance 
framework, institutional arrangements, and schemes; 
● Assisting the RGC to cost out and expand benefit packages of all SHP schemes (HEFs, 
National Society Security Fund (NSSF), and future schemes) to meet the needs of the 
population; 
● Supporting demand-side advocacy from civil society and citizen engagement to increase 
public domestic resources and budget transparency for social protections; and 



● Building RGC capacity to pilot innovative approaches that improve accountability, as 
well as allocative and technical efficiency of national and sub-national budgeting and 
spending, such as the use of mobile and other non-cash payments for health services. 


 

Sub-Purpose 3: Improved quality of public and private health and social services 

 

Improving social and healthcare service quality through a holistic and as appropriate, integrated, 
approach has been defined as a core principle in the strategic plans of the Ministry of Health 
(MoH) and the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY), so as to 
ensure that all Cambodians are able to achieve the highest level of health and well-being. 

USAID/Cambodia views quality of health care as critical for the expansion of SHP ̶ 

specifically, the development of a social health insurance (SHI) system in Cambodia. The Project 
aims to build on the success of USAID/Cambodia’s investment in health quality improvement. It 
will support the MoH to bring quality of health care to the next level, where health care services 
provided by both the public and private sectors meet a minimum acceptable standard of quality, 
established under the National Policy for Quality in Health. Critical elements of strengthened 
quality include improving health and social service delivery efficiency and effectiveness, and 
improving regulation and its enforcement. 

 

Illustrative Project interventions include: 

 

● Supporting the RGC in the development and implementation of policies and guidelines 
that meet global standards and improve quality and efficiency in service delivery; 
● Assisting the RGC and professional councils to develop and enforce regulations, laws, 
and policies for licensing and accreditation of public and private health professionals and 
facilities, and conditioning licensure of private facilities on their employment of 
registered/licensed practitioners; 
● Building the RGC capacity, skills, and systems for improved performance of public and 
private health and social service workforce; 
● Enhancing health management and leadership at sub-national level; 
● Strengthening and institutionalizing continuous quality improvement systems at the sub- 
national level for both public and private facilities; 
● Supporting the RGC to implement policies and systems that help disease programs to 
develop, innovate, and scale up cost-effective approaches to identifying the last 
undiagnosed cases of HIV, finding the missing third of TB cases, and eliminating malaria 
infections; 
● Strengthening citizen advocacy and demand for quality health and child protection 
services; 
● Piloting a Child Protection Information Management System at the national level and in 
the five target provinces, and adjusted and strengthened based on experience and lessons 
learnt; 
● Strengthening the social service workforce to improve the effectiveness of social services 
and support provided to children and families and to promote accessibility of family- 
based care options; and 



● Strengthening the care system for children and families through a coordinated 
government response and with more educated and engaged families and communities. 


 

The Project will implement a small percentage of activities that involve pesticides, small scale 
construction, and healthcare waste. The following is what the Project will be doing in these 
sectors: 

 

Pesticides 

 

Under malaria control activities in this Project, the following illustrative activities will be 
performed: 

 

- Procure and supply long-lasting insecticide treated nets (LLINs) through Washington- 
based mechanisms; 
- Support community-based organizations and groups to conduct behavior change and 
social mobilization activities to promote and monitor consistent LLIN use; 
- Support distribution of LLINs and appropriate behavior change campaign messaging to 
ensure access and use of LLINs. 


 

Malaria control activities involving the use or recommendation for use of pesticides related to 
insecticide treated net (ITN) distribution and net impregnation/re-impregnation may have minor 
adverse environmental impacts. 

 

Small Scale Construction 

 

The scope of USAID/Cambodia’s Health program is focused primarily on the provision of 
technical assistance, and, as such, many program activities do not have potential impacts to the 
environment. However, some OPHE activities may occasionally undertake minor construction, 
repairs and renovations to existing structures, which may include repainting walls, improving 
lighting and electric/network wires, improving air conditioning, etc. 

 

The USAID/Cambodia Health Team will work with its implementing partners and collaborating 
agencies to ensure there is an Environmental Monitoring and Mitigation Plan in place to avoid 
any negative environmental impact from such activities. 

 

Healthcare Waste 

 

USAID/Cambodia OPHE activities will involve procurement and disposal of medical equipment 
and supplies, such as condoms and hypodermic needles, which can have minor adverse 
environmental impacts. Project activities that involve service delivery to clients will require 
disposal of medical equipment and medical waste. 

 

Waste management will follow host country MoH guidelines by contracting local entities 
licensed by the MoH to handle medical waste. Clinics will collaborate with MoH referral 


hospitals to dispose of waste in accordance with MoH guidelines. In accordance with MoH 
guidelines, waste management will follow the steps below: 

 

 Sorting: separating waste by type at the location where it is generated; 
 Handling: collecting and transporting waste within the facility; 
 Interim storage: storing waste within the facility until it can be disposed; 
 Final disposal: eliminating or transporting solid medical waste, liquid, sharps, and 
hazardous chemical waste from the health facility. 






 

Methods of medical waste treatment and disposal: methods for the treatment and disposal of 
medical wastes include: incineration (burning), chemical disinfection, wet and dry thermal 
treatment, microwave irradiation, land disposal, inertization and encapsulation (detailed 
information is described in MoH Infection Prevention and Control Guidelines for Health Care 
Facilities, July 26, 2010). 

 

2.0 Country Information 

 

1. The Ministry of Health of Cambodia, with support from the World Health Organization, has 
developed a National Policy on Health Care Waste Management (June 2009) and Infection 
Prevention and Control Guidelines for Healthcare Facilities (2010). These policies provide 
guidance to health care facilities in Cambodia with regards to proper measures for handling 
medical waste. 


 

2. The legal requirements for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) in Cambodia are set 
out in the Law on Environmental Protection and Natural Resource Management, 1996 
(Chapter III) (EPNRM Law) and the Sub-Decree on Environmental Impact Assessment, 
1999 (EIA Sub-Decree). There are also a number of Prakas (regulations promulgated by a 
Ministry to implement a law) on the procedures implementing the EIA Sub-Decree 1999: 
• Prakas on Guidelines for Conducting EIA Report (49 Ministry of Environment, March 
2000); 
• Prakas on Determination of Service Charge for Environmental Impact Assessment 
Report Review and Follow-up and Monitoring of Project Implementation (No. 745, October 
2000); 
• Prakas (Declaration) on General Guidelines for Conducting Initial and Full 
Environmental Impact Assessment Reports (No. 376 BRK.BST 2009); 
• Prakas on Registration of Consulting Firms for Studying and Preparing Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment Report (No. 215 Brk MoE 2014); and 
• Prakas on Establishment of the Technical Working Group for Reviewing and 
Commenting on the EIA Report (No. 063 Pr.k MoE 2014). 




 

3. There is also a Sub-Decree 146 on Economic Land Concessions (ELC), 2005, which requires 
environmental assessment of ELCs. Article 7, clause 5 of Sub-Decree 146 states that “if the 
initial environmental and social impact assessment indicates a medium or high degree of 
adverse impact, arrange for the conduct of a full environmental and social impact 
assessment.” 



4. Cambodia is currently preparing an Environmental Code with an EIA component. Tropical 
forests and the conservation of biodiversity play a fundamental role in sustainable 
development. As such The U.S. Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as amended by 
Sections 118 and 119, requires that all USAID Missions conduct a periodic country analysis 
of the conservation and sustainable use of tropical forests and biological diversity. These 
analyses can help inform project design and implementation. 


 

5. The USAID Cambodia Tropical Forestry and Biodiversity (118/119) Assessment can be 
accessed at the following website: 


http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pnaea955.pdf 

 

6. The Ministry of Rural Development’s Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy 
2010-2025 covers policies and procedures to ensure safe and sustained water supplies. 


 

3.1Analysis of Potential Environmental Impact 

 

While development activities are intended to provide benefits for targeted recipients, when 
managed ineffectively they may cause adverse impacts that can offset or eliminate these intended 
benefits. Impacts can be direct, indirect, or cumulative. They can also be beneficial or negative. 
The USAID Sector environmental guidelines are good resources in finding more information on 
potential impacts for various sectors. 

 

The following link is to all sector guidelines: http://www.usaidgems.org/sectorGuidelines.htm 

 

The following are summaries of potential environmental impacts for respective sector(s) that are 
related to the scope of this IEE. 

 

Pesticides 

 

The health and environmental hazards of the pesticides proposed for use are assessed in the 
attached PERSUAP (Attachment1) for the Cambodia Malaria Elimination Project (CMEP). 
Synthetic pyrethroids used in insecticide treated nets (ITNs) pose a very low risk to humans or to 
the environment if used correctly. Exposure predominantly occurs as a result of improper 
handling of insecticides during regular re-impregnation of mosquito nets (e.g., splashing on the 
skin, into the eyes or through ingestion), accidents caused by insufficient awareness of pesticide 
risks and safe handling practices, and poorly or mislabeled containers. Minimal exposure during 
actual use of ITN (i.e., sleeping under the nets) can occur due to inhalation of insecticide that has 
volatilized from the net, dermal contact with the net and oral exposure from hand-to-mouth or 
direct contact. In addition, some percentage of LLINs may be re-purposed in ways that could 
increase exposure to pyrethroids, such as fishing. Despite these risks, however, the beneficial 
impacts of bed net re-impregnation are significant, as insecticide treated bed nets are proven to be 
more effective in preventing mosquito bites. 


To reduce the impact of pesticides used in re-treatment, CMEP will fully implement the safe use 
action plan of the attached PERSUAP. 

 

Small Scale Construction 

Construction projects may cause both direct and indirect potential adverse environmental 
impacts. 

 

Environmental impacts of special concern include: 

 

• Damage to sensitive or valuable ecosystems 
• Compaction of the soil and grading of the site 
• Sedimentation of surface waters 
• Contamination of ground and water supplies 
• Adverse social impacts 
• Spread of Disease 
• Damage to aesthetics of site/area 


 

Construction also has potential adverse impacts on workers. Worldwide, construction is a 
dangerous occupation. In developing countries overall, construction is estimated to be on average 
10 times more dangerous than in developed economies. 

 

Typical health and safety risks to construction workers in developing countries include falls and 
falling objects, crush injuries from collapses and heavy equipment, flying debris, and exposure to 
toxics such as solvents, cement dust, lead and asbestos. Climates with increased temperatures 
may also lead to more health impacts on workers due to extreme heat stress. Occupational injuries 
and illnesses can permanently deprive construction workers of the ability to earn a livelihood 
– and are often fatal. 

 

Healthcare Waste 

Some potential adverse impacts from mismanaged healthcare waste include: 

 

• Transmission of disease through infectious waste is the greatest and most immediate threat 
from healthcare waste. If waste is not treated in a way that destroys the pathogenic organisms, 
dangerous quantities of microscopic disease-causing agents—viruses, bacteria, parasites or 
fungi—will be present in the waste. These agents can enter the body through punctures and other 
breaks in the skin, mucous membranes in the mouth, by being inhaled into the lungs, being 
swallowed, or being transmitted by a vector organism. 
• Chemical and pharmaceutical wastes, especially large quantities, can be a threat to the 
environment and human health. Since hazardous chemical wastes may be toxic, corrosive, 
flammable, reactive, and/or explosive, they can harm people who touch, inhale or are in close 
proximity to them. If burned, they may explode or produce toxic fumes. Some pharmaceuticals 
are toxic as well. 


 

Recommended Threshold Decisions 

 

- Justification for Categorical Exclusion Request 



 

Some of the activities described justify Categorical Exclusions, pursuant to 22CFR216.2(c)(1) 
and (2), for which an Initial Environmental Examination or an Environmental Assessment are 
not required because the actions do not have an effect on the natural or physical environment. 

 

Specifically, as currently planned, these activities fall into the following classes of action: 

- Education, technical assistance, or training programs except to the extent such programs 
include activities directly affecting the environment (such as construction of facilities, etc.) 
- Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings 
- Document and information transfers 




 

The activities under review that justify Categorical Exclusion (CE) include: 

 

● Technical assistance to Ministry of Health and other relevant RGC structures; technical 
studies, functional analysis of institutional structures; 
● Analyses (evaluations, operations research and assessments) of previously implemented 
HIV/AIDS activities in Cambodia; develop and implement a data dissemination plan to 
incorporate findings into HIV programs and policy; 
● Advocacy support for civil society and citizen engagement to increase public domestic 
resources and budget transparency for social protections; 
● Capacity building for government officials to pilot innovative approaches that improve 
accountability and efficiency in budgeting and spending. 


 

The following two tables provide Implementing Mechanisms covered in this IEE for which all 
the activities are recommended for Categorical Exclusion. 

 

Existing mechanisms that will continue under this IEE: 

 

Activity Name 

Brief Description 

Support to the Social 
Health Protection 
Project in Cambodia 

Develop and implement social security system so that poor and 
vulnerable population in Cambodia is healthier and faces less financial 
burden. 

 

The main scope of this project is Technical Assistance provision. None 
of the project activities require environmental action. 

Health Information 
Policy and Advocacy 
Program (HIPA) 

Improve data completeness, quality, and usage of data by policy makers 
for general health services, including national health programs 

 

The main scope of this project is Technical Assistance provision. None 
of the project activities require environmental action. 

Social Health Protection 
Project (SHP) 

Establish third-party monitoring and information systems for managing 
Health Equity Funds, to provide social health protection for the poor. 

 

This project provides Technical Assistance to the MOH to expand the 




 

 

Health Equity Fund (HEF) nationwide, with specific attention to ensuring 
accountability and transparency of operations, and leveraging HEF 
reimbursements to improve the quality of care in public health facilities. 
The project is not directly involved in supporting facility service delivery 
but focuses on improvement of the social health protection scheme policy, 
procedures and capacity building of the national and local health 
system. 

HIV Innovate and 
Evaluate Project 

Support evaluations, operations research and assessments of USG- 
supported HIV/AIDS activities in Cambodia 

 

The main scope of this project is Technical Assistance provision and 
work in the area of research, analysis, evaluation. None of the project 
activities require environmental action. 

Empowering 
Communities for Health 
Program (ECH) 

Enhance skills of Village Health Support Groups, strengthen their 
technical linkages to Health Centers, and institutionalize them under 
local government structures 

 

The main scope of this project is Technical Assistance and Capacity 
Building for Village Health Support Groups and Advocacy Support to 
local government structures. 



 

New mechanisms that will be implemented under this IEE: 

 

 

Social and Behavior 
Change (SBC) 

Strengthen capacity of National Center for Health Promotion (NCHP) to 
work with other relevant ministries to deploy quality and impactful Social 
and Behavior Change strategies and campaigns 

 

The main scope of this project is Technical Assistance provision. None 
of the project activities require environmental action. 

 

 

- Negative Determination with Conditions 

 

Activities with potential impacts to the environment under the sectors of pesticides, small scale 
construction, and healthcare waste; are recommended for a Negative Determination with 
Conditions threshold determination. When implemented ineffectively these activities may cause 
adverse impacts that can offset or eliminate the intended benefits. Mitigating environmental 
impacts with these activities requires a participatory approach to activity/program design and 
management. Strong technical design of the projects is also critical. 

 

The Implementing Mechanisms in the table below are ones that (in addition to categorical 
excluded activities) have activities that are recommended for Negative Determination with 
Conditions per 22 CFR 216.3(2) (iii). 


Existing mechanisms that will continue under this IEE: 

 

Activity Name 

Brief Description 

Sector of primary 
potential impact 

HIV Flagship 

Provide technical innovation and 
improvements in quality and capacity to 
deliver sustainable HIV services 

Healthcare waste 

Quality Health Services 

Improve basic newborn care; improve 
care and referrals in cases of obstetric 
complications; improve and expand 
family planning services; strengthen care 
for child malnutrition and related 
diseases 

Healthcare waste 

Cambodia Malaria 
Elimination Project 
(CMEP) 

Intensify malaria elimination activities; 
support high quality malaria control and 
prevention interventions in target areas; 
enhance surveillance systems; build 
capacity in control and elimination 

Pesticide use 
Healthcare waste 



 

New mechanisms that will be implemented under this IEE: 

 

Quality Improvement 

Improve health care service quality in 
public and private sectors through 
improved service delivery, and improved 
regulation. The main scope of this 
project is Technical Assistance 
provision, and as such these project 
activities do not require environmental 
action. 

 

It is possible that small-scale cosmetic 
minor refurbishment, construction, 
renovation or rehabilitation activities 
may be undertaken in connection with 
implementing this activity. For this 
reason it is recommended for Negative 
Determination with Conditions. 

Small-scale construction 



 

The following are specific conditions to mitigate the potential negative impacts for respective 
sectors: 

 

Pesticides 


The following are conditions and best practices that should be implemented for all activities 
related to the use or procurement of pesticides: 

 

1. The implementing partner and USAID shall follow the USAID Pesticide Procedures (22 
CFR 216.3(b)) and no funds shall be expended for the procurement or use of pesticides 
unless they are specifically approved through an amendment to this IEE in accordance 
with 22 CFR 216.3(b). This should include the development, approval and 
implementation of a Pesticide Evaluation Report and Safe Use Action Plan (PERSUAP). 
The procedures can be found at the following link: 
https://www.usaid.gov/our_work/environment/compliance/22cfr216#216.3 






 

2. All activities will implement the best practices identified in the appropriate chapters of 
USAID Environmental Guidelines, including the chapter on Integrated Pest Management 
(http://usaidgems.org/Sectors/ipm.htm); and Safe Pesticide Use 
(http://usaidgems.org/Sectors/saferUse.htm) 






 

3. An Environmental Monitoring and Mitigation Plan (EMMP) shall include any finding 
from an approved PERSUAP. 






 

Please note that under condition 1 above, this IEE, which presents the Pesticide Evaluation 
Report Safer Use Action Plan (PERSUAP) for the Cambodia Malaria Elimination Project in 
Attachment 1, addresses the requirements of 22 CFR 216.3(b) (“Pesticide Procedures”) for the 
Project’s assistance involving procurement and use of pesticides. 

 

This IEE thus establishes: 

- the set of pesticides for which procurement, use, or support for use is authorized for the 
same or similar uses by USEPA for USAID/Cambodia Malaria activities; and 
- the Safer Use Action Plan (see Section 4 of the PERSUAP) as the conditions under which 
the authorized pesticides may be procured, used, or their use supported to best ensure 
user, consumer and environmental safety. 




 

Small Scale Construction 

 

The following are conditions and best practices that should be implemented: 

 

1. All construction activities shall be conducted following principles for environmentally 
sound construction, as provided in the USAID Sector Environmental Guidelines - Small 
Scale Construction, which can be found at: 
http://www.usaidgems.org/Sectors/construction.htm. 


 

2. For the rehabilitation of existing facilities and for construction of facilities in which the 
total surface area disturbed is less than 10,000 square feet, the Implementing Partner shall 
conduct and prepare a supplemental Environmental Review Checklist (ERC) documenting 
a site specific environmental review. A link to the ERC template is below. 


 

The ERC should include an Environmental Monitoring and Mitigation Plan (EMMP) and 


answers to the questions from the “Key Questions for Construction Activities” section, 
starting on page 6 of the above mentioned sector environmental guideline. Construction 
will not begin until such a review and report is completed and approved by the A/COR in 
consultation with Mission Environmental Officer. 

 

3. For the construction of any facilities in which the total surface area disturbed exceeds 
10,000 square feet (1,000 square meters) or are considered to have significant effect on 
the environment, the IEE must be amended and may need an Environmental Analysis. 


 

4. The partner should design activities to minimize vulnerability of facilities to climate 
change. 


 

5. A USAID Engineer is available to review all construction designs. 


 

A template for the ERC can be found under the Asia section at the following website: 
http://www.usaidgems.org/compliance.htm 

 

The checklist found at the following website should be used to monitor activities: 
http://www.usaidgems.org/Documents/VisualFieldGuides/ENCAP_VslFldGuide-- 
Construction_22Dec2011.pdf 

 

Healthcare Waste 

 

The following are conditions and best practices that should be implemented for activities 
involving healthcare waste: 

 

1. All activities shall be conducted following principles for environmentally sound 
development, as provided in the USAID Sector Environmental Guidelines – Healthcare 
Waste. This document can be found at: 
http://www.usaidgems.org/Sectors/healthcareWaste.htm 


 

2. An Environmental Monitoring and Mitigation Plan (EMMP) shall be developed that 
includes the principles of the guidelines. 


 

3. Each activity that has healthcare waste should have a sound healthcare waste 
management plan and system to minimize adverse health and environmental impacts 
caused by their wastes. A program to manage healthcare wastes includes the minimum 
elements: 1. Written plan; 2. Clear responsibilities; 3. Written, internal rules; 4. Staff 
training; 5. Protective clothing; 6. Good hygiene practices; 7. Vaccinated workers; 8. 
Designated storage locations; 9. Waste minimization; 10. Waste segregation; 11. Waste 
Treatment; 12. Final disposal site; 13. Periodic reviews. The format and guidance of this 
report will be provided by the A/COR and should include the qualities of “MINIMAL 
PROGRAM CHECKLIST AND ACTION PLAN” section, starting on page 20 of the 
above-mentioned sector environmental guideline. 


 

4. With activities involving health commodities, the implementing partners should have a 



written plan to ensure appropriate procurement, storage, management and/or disposal of 
public health commodities, including pharmaceutical drugs and nutritional supplements 
such as established adequate procedures and capacities in place to properly manage and 
dispose of such commodities. 

 

The checklist found at the following website should be used for monitoring: 
http://www.usaidgems.org/Documents/VisualFieldGuides/medwastJan2010.pdf 

 

 

Climate Risk Management 

 

The Climate Risk Screening Analysis showed that over the five-year period of this Project, 
activities may be prone to moderate climate risks such as flooding and drought that are usually 
part of normal weather patterns in Cambodia. Cambodia often faces two types of flooding: flash- 
flooding by heavy rainfall and prolonged flood from the Mekong River. The Project Design team 
accepted the flooding risk, because the nature of its locations and weather pattern conditions 
described above. However, the team recognizes that prolonged flooding from the Mekong River 
could increase the risk of water-borne diseases and vector-borne diseases, including malaria. 

 

Drought may also decrease the productivity of gardens and fish ponds, which would have an 
impact on nutrition. This climate risk increases morbidity and increases the burden on health 
facilities which could result in decreased service delivery quality. Internal migration due to 
climate change also hinders access to health care and prevention of infectious diseases like HIV, 
malaria and TB. 

 

To address these risks, OPHE will work with the host government on timely surveillance and 
emergency response planning and design prevention interventions to reach migrant populations. 
OPHE will also work with the host government on risk-mapping, investigating disease outbreaks 
and ensure drugs and commodities are available during outbreaks. OPHE will also collaborate 
with USAID’s Office of Food Security and Environment to help mitigate the impact of climate 
change on beneficiaries’ livelihoods. To strengthen climate resilience, the Project will work with 
the host government to promote dietary diversity for nutrition program or ensure HEF reaches all 
vulnerable populations so they can access health services through the RGC’s social health 
protection program. 

 

 


USAID/Cambodia 

Cambodia Health Project (May 2017 - June 2023) 

Project-Level Climate Risk Management Summary Table 

Attachment D 

 

In order to document the climate risk management process and its results, the below table must be completed and included in the Summary of 
Conclusions from Analyses section of the PAD and the Project’s Initial Environment Examination (IEE), if applicable. In addition, the PAD narrative 
must contain a summary of the climate risk assessment methodology and the main results of the assessment. See “Climate Risk Management for 
USAID Projects and Activities” for more information. 

 

Defined or Anticipated 
Project Elements 

(Purpose/ Sub-purpose, 
Areas of Focus, or 
Activities/Mechanisms, etc.) 

Climate Risks 

List all risks related to the 
project elements identified 
through either the strategy- or 
project-level climate risk 
assessment. 

Risk Rating 

Low/ Moderate/ 
High 

How Risks Addressed at 
Project Level 

Describe how risks have been 
addressed at the project level. 
If a decision has been made to 
accept the risk briefly explain 
why. 

Risks Addressed or Further 
Analysis to be Conducted in 
Activity Design/ 
Implementation 

Describe CRM measures to be 
integrated into activity design 
or implementation, including 
additional analysis, if 
applicable. 

Opportunities to Strengthen 
Climate Resilience 

Describe any opportunities to 
achieve multiple development 
objectives by integrating 
climate resilience or mitigation 
measures 

 

Sub-purpose 1: Improved 
health and child 
protection behaviors 

 

 

 

Flooding risk to 
agricultural areas 

 Moderate 

Accepted risk as it is part 
of the normal weather 
patterns of Cambodia 

 N/A 

 N/A 

Water-borne diseases 
and vector-borne 
diseases 

 Moderate 

Timely surveillance and 
emergency response at 
the outset of outbreak 

 

Work with Royal 
Government of Cambodia 
(RGC) counterparts at the 
national and sub-national 
level to respond 

Risk-mapping and 
investigation of 
outbreaks 

 

Ensure buffer stock to 
respond to outbreaks 

 

Ensure commodity 
availability 

 

Organize community 
campaign to educate 

Opportunity to work with 
RGC (Cambodian Ministry 
of Health Communicable 
Disease Control 
Department [CDC]) in 
reducing communicable 
diseases 

 

Strengthen Cambodian 
surveillance to report and 
respond in a timely 
manner 




people on intervention 
activity to reduce 
outbreak 

Nutrition impacts due to 
drought 

 Moderate 

Working with other 

development partners 
and 

with MOH and provincial 

health departments, 

develop strategies for 
getting other non-fish 
sources of protein 

Risk mapping of drought 
prone areas 

Support RGC in 
continuing to promote 
dietary diversity 

Heat stress due to 
increasing temperatures 

 Low 

 N/A 

 N/A 

Explore possibility of 
educating healthcare 
providers on heat stress 
awareness 

Internal migration from 
climate risk-prone areas. 
This is critical especially 
where people migrated 
due to climate 
risk/disaster related 
events could hinder their 
ability to sleep under 
proper bed net. 

Moderate 

Adapt approaches to 
service delivery (including 
mobile clinics) 

 

Work with local officials 
to map movements in 
order to appropriately 
respond to their needs 

Analysis of migration 
patterns 

 

Provide education to 
vulnerable groups on 
disease and health risks 

 

Strength access to health 
services in drought/flood 
affected areas 

 

Mobile malaria 
populations policy and 
development guidelines 



 

Sub-purpose 2: Improved 
health financing and 
social health protection 

 

Increased morbidity due 
to cataclysmic climactic 
event, creating increased 
medical need 

Low 

N/A 

N/A 

Support RGC to ensure 
that Health Equity Fund 
(HEF) reaches all 
vulnerable populations 




 

Provide education to 
vulnerable groups on 
disease and health risks 

Climate change 
negatively affects 
livelihoods and pushes 
more people into 
poverty, putting more 
pressure on social health 
protection systems 

Moderate 

Work with Food Security 
& Environment Office 
(FSE) to help mitigate 
climate change impact on 
livelihoods 

Risk mapping in target 
areas 

Support RGC to ensure 
that HEF reaches all 
vulnerable populations 

Sub-purpose 3: Improved 
quality of public and 
private health and social 
services 

Increased morbidity due 
climate-related changes 
(e.g. increase in flooding) 

Moderate 

Timely surveillance and 
emergency response at 
the outset of outbreak 

 

Work with RGC 
counterparts at the 
national and sub-national 
level to respond 

Ensure buffer stock to 
respond to outbreaks 

 

Ensure commodity 
availability 

 

Organize community 
campaign to educate 
people on intervention 
activity to reduce 
outbreak 

Opportunity to work with 
RGC (Cambodian CDC) in 
reducing communicable 
diseases 

 

Strengthen Cambodian 
surveillance to report and 
respond in a timely 
manner 




 

 

 

Update of Implementation of Conditions from IEE (ASIA 14-141) 

 

For those activities that received a Negative Determination with Conditions threshold 
determination under ASIA 14-141, Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plans (EMMP) 
were developed and approved by the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) in consultation 
with the Mission Environmental Officer (MEO). EMMPs have been revised at the necessary 
intervals to ensure appropriate mitigation measures were being applied in the project. All the 
actions in the EMMPs are being implemented by implementing partners and are being reported 
on in projects’ progress reports. In addition, AORs have used the EMMPs during site visits to 
monitor the implementation and progress of activities. 

 

For those activities that received a Categorical Exclusion, there are no significant updates or 
lessons learned upon implementation of program activities. The implemented activities did not 
raise any concerns about environmental compliance. 

 

Monitoring and Implementation 

 

In addition to the specific conditions enumerated in the Negative with Conditions section, the 
threshold determinations recommended are contingent on full implementation of the following 
general monitoring and implementation requirements: 

 

USAID Requirements 

 

1. Environmental compliance actions and results in USAID solicitations and awards. The 
Contract/Agreement Officer will include language and reference to this IEE in appropriate 
solicitations and awards. Suggested language for use in solicitation and awards can be found at 
the following link: http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200/204sac 


 

2. Implementing Partner (IP) Briefings on Environmental Compliance Responsibilities. 
The Contract/Agreement Officer’s Representative (C/AOR) will provide the IP with a copy of 
this IEE; the IP will be briefed on their environmental compliance responsibilities by their 
C/AOR. During this briefing, the IEE conditions applicable to the IP’s activities will be 
identified. For ongoing IMs that will have their existing IEE be replaced by this IEE, the A/COR 
should provide a copy of this IEE and review roles and responsibilities. 


 

3. Compliance Monitoring. As required by ADS 204.3.4, USAID will actively monitor and 
evaluate, by means of desktop reviews and site visits, whether there are new or unforeseen 
consequences arising during implementation that were not identified and reviewed in accordance 
with 22 CFR 216 (Reg. 216). USAID will also monitor the need for additional review. If 
additional activities not described in this document are added to this program, an amended 



environmental examination will be prepared in a timely manner and approved. 

 

4. Compliance Reporting. A summary report of Mission’s compliance relative to this IEE will 
be sent to the BEO on an annual basis, normally in connection with preparation of the Mission’s 
annual environmental compliance report required under ADS 203.3.8.5 and 204.3.3. The BEO 
or his/her designated representative may conduct site visits or request additional information for 
compliance monitoring purposes. 


Implementing Partner (IP) Requirements 

 

1. Development of Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP). For activities 
that are subject to one or more conditions set out in the “Recommended Threshold Decision” 
section of this IEE, the IP will develop and provide an EMMP for USAID C/AOR review and 
approval, documenting how their project will implement and verify all IEE conditions that apply 
to their activities. The EMMP will also identify how the IP will assure that IEE conditions that 
apply to activities supported under subcontracts and sub-grants are implemented. (In the case of 
large sub-grants or subcontracts, the IP may elect to require the sub-grantee/subcontractor to 
develop their own EMMP.) 


 

2. Integration and implementation of EMMP. The IP will integrate the EMMP into their 
project work plan and budgets, implement the EMMP, and report on its implementation as an 
element of regular project performance reporting. The IP will ensure that sub-contractors and 
sub-grantees integrate implementation of IEE conditions, where applicable, into their own 
project work plans and budgets and report on their implementation as an element of sub-contract 
or grant performance reporting. 


 

3. Integration of environmental compliance responsibilities in sub-contracts and grant 
agreements. The IP will ensure that sub-contracts and sub-grant agreements reference and 
require compliance with relevant elements of the IEE and any attendant conditions. 


 

4. Assurance of sub-grantee and sub-contractor capacity and compliance. The IP will 
ensure that sub-grantees and subcontractors have the capability to implement the relevant 
requirements of this IEE. The IP will, as and if appropriate, provide training to sub-grantees and 
subcontractors in their environmental compliance responsibilities and in environmentally sound 
design and management (ESDM) of their activities. 


 

5. New or modified activities. As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans 
thereafter, the IP, in collaboration with their C/AOR, shall review all planned and ongoing 
activities to determine if they are within the scope of this IEE. If any IP activities are planned that 
would be outside the scope of this IEE, an amendment to this IEE addressing these activities will 
be prepared for USAID review and approval. No such new activities will be undertaken 
prior to formal approval of this amendment. Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope 
of the approved Reg. 216 environmental documentation will be halted until an amendment to the 
documentation is submitted and written approval is received from USAID. This includes 
activities that were previously within the scope of the IEE, but were substantively modified in 
such a way that they move outside of the scope. 


 

6. Compliance with Host Country Requirements. Nothing in this IEE substitutes for or 



supersedes IP, sub-grantee and subcontractor responsibility for compliance with all applicable 
host country laws and regulations for all host countries in which activities will be conducted 
under the USAID activity. The IP, sub-grantees and subcontractor must comply with each host 
country’s environmental regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. However, 
in case of conflict between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

7. Compliance Reporting. IPs will report on environmental compliance requirements as part 
of their routine project reporting to USAID. 


 

Revisions 

 

If during implementation, project activities are considered outside of those described in this 
document, an amendment shall be submitted. Pursuant to 22CFR216.3(a)(9), if new activities are 
added and/or information becomes available which indicates that activities to be funded by the 
project might be “major” and the project’s effect “significant,” this determination will be 
reviewed and revised by the C/AOR of the project, and submitted to the Mission Environmental 
Officer and Bureau Environmental Officer for approval and, if appropriate, an environmental 
assessment will be prepared. It is the responsibility of the C/AOR to keep the Mission 
Environmental Officer and the BEO informed of any new information or changes in the activity 
that might require revision of the IEE. 

 

Limitations 

 

The Cambodia Health Program will not undertake any activities determined to pose a significant effect on 
the environment under 22 CFR 216.2(d)(1). This IEE does not cover activities involving: 

 Activities involving indoor residual spraying of pesticides for malaria control. 
 Activities involving procurement, transport, use, storage, or disposal of toxic materials (other than 
pesticides identified in this IEE); 
 Procurement or use and/or disposal of Asbestos Containing Materials (ACM) (i.e. piping, roofing, 
etc.), Polychlorinated Biphenyl’s (PCB) or other hazardous/toxic materials for construction 
projects; 
 Procurement, use and/or disposal of equipment containing and/or generating low-level 
radioactive materials and wastes. 




 

Any of these actions would require an IEE amendment to be approved by the BEO. 

 

 

List of Attachments 

 

1. PERSUAP for Cambodia Malaria Elimination Project (CMEP) 


