 

 

Issue Date: February 28, 2020 

Deadline for Question Clarifications: March 9, 2020 

Closing Date: April 15, 2020 (09:00 am, Hanoi Time) 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number: 72044020RFA00004 

 

Activity Title: USAID Biodiversity Conservation 

 

 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Vietnam (USAID/Vietnam) is 
seeking applications for a Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the “USAID 
Biodiversity Conservation” activity. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. The authority for 
the NOFO is found in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the responsible applicant whose application best meets the 
requirements of this NOFO and the Merit Review Criteria contained herein. While one award is 
anticipated as a result of this Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), USAID reserves the right to 
fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

 

Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received funding from USAID may be 
subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, ensure adequacy of financial controls, 
and establish an indirect cost rate. 

 

For the purposes of this NOFO the term “Grant” is synonymous with “Cooperative Agreement”; 
“Grantee” is synonymous with “Recipient”; and “Grant Officer” is synonymous with “Agreement 
Officer”. Eligible organizations interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
funding opportunity thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and evaluation process. The successful applicant will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the website to ensure 
they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity. It is the responsibility 
of the applicant to ensure that the entire NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety and 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion processes. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.8. 


The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin registration early in the process. 



Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for questions 
is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to all 
potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted on www.grants.gov. 



Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part 
of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation 
or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of 
the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 



Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 





Sincerely, 









Bruce Gelband 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition & Assistance 

USAID/Vietnam 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
SECTION A: FUNDING OPPOTUNITY DESCRIPTION .......................................................... 5 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ................................................................. 18 
B.1 ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED............................................................................................................. 18 
B.2 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE .......................................................................................... 18 
B.3 SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT ................................................................................... 18 
B.4 AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE ............................................................................ 18 
B.5 NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT ....... 18 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ........................................................................... 20 
C.1 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS .................................................................................................. 20 
C.2 COST SHARING OR MATCHING ................................................................................... 20 
C.3 ELIGIBILITY OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR USAID FINANCING ...................... 20 
C.4 ELIGIBILITY OF ACTIVITIES UNDER USAID’S ENVIRONMENTAL 
REGULATIONS ................................................................................................................. 21 
C.5 LIMITATIONS ON SUBMISSIONS ................................................................................. 22 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ..................................... 23 
D.1 AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT ..................................................................................... 23 
D.2 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ......................................................................................... 23 
D.3 SUBMISSION DATE AND TIME .................................................................................... 23 
D.4 APPLICANTS RESPONSIVENESS .................................................................................. 24 
D.5 APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES .............................................................. 24 
D.6 TECHNICAL APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS ............................................................. 26 
D.7 COST APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS ......................................................................... 30 
D.8 UNIQUE ENTITY IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT ...... 35 
D.9 PRE-AWARD COSTS ........................................................................................................ 36 
D.10 BRANDING STRATEGY AND MARKING PLAN (BS/MP)...................................... 36 
D.11 CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) .......................... 36 
D.12 PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 37 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ....................................................... 39 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ............................ 41 
F.1 FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES ......................................................................................... 41 
F.2 ADMINISTRATION .......................................................................................................... 41 
F.3 PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL REPORTING .................................................................. 41 
 F.4 LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................................................ 41 
F.5 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................... 42 
F.6 SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION ............. 45 
F.7 PROGRAM INCOME ........................................................................................................ 45 
REFERENCES ........................................................................................... 46 
FULL APPLICATION BUDGET TEMPLATE ..................................... 48 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR REGISTRATION IN DUNS AND SAM.GOV... 
...................................................................................................................... 49 
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION .................................... 50 


 

 

 


SECTION A: FUNDING OPPOTUNITY DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

A.1 TITLE OF ACTIVITY 


 

USAID Biodiversity Conservation 

 

A.2 BACKGROUND AND COUNTRY CONTEXT 


 

Vietnam is growing rapidly both demographically and economically. The population quadrupled 
between 1950 and 2017 to almost 94 million, recently growing at 1.1 percent annually. Population 
density is roughly 283 people/km2, putting increasing demand on the country’s natural resources 
and land base. Already a lower middle-income country, annual GDP growth of Vietnam is among 
the world’s most rapid (6-7 percent per year) and the Government of Vietnam (GVN) aims to 
achieve middle-income status by 2035. However, approximately 9.8 percent of the population still 
lives below the national poverty line1 despite these GDP gains. 

1 World Bank’s Vietnam Country Profile 

2 Thuy, P.T., Moeliono, M., Nguyen, T.H., Nguyen, H.T., Vu, T.H. (2012). The context of REDD+ in Vietnam Drivers, 
agents and institutions. CIFOR. 

3 Rhett A. Butler. 2016. What are the world’s most biodiverse countries? Source: http://bit.ly/btcs577 

4 WWF. 2011. Extinction of the Javan Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros sondaicus) from Vietnam 

5 Horne, B.D., Chan, E.H., Platt, S.G. & Moll, E.O. 2019. Batagur affinis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 
2019 

 

Forest area of Vietnam is estimated to be 14.5 million hectares (ha), or 44 percent of the total land 
area, with roughly 4.1 million hectares of plantations. Forest cover is increasing, with the most 
rapid growth in production forests. Annual forest cover change between 2010 and 2015 was about 
+0.9 percent. Forest quality, however, is widely described as decreasing; that is, there is a trend of 
highly diverse natural forests being displaced or degraded, with a loss of plant and animal 
biodiversity in those forests. Estimates in 2012 were that only 80,000 ha of primary natural forest 
remains in the country with most found in the Central Highlands and the southeast.2 This rapid loss 
is a critical threat to biodiversity and watershed protection. 

 

Vietnam is ranked as the 16th most biodiverse country in the world, as complex topography and 
varied climate results in a wide variety of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems that support a great 
diversity of species. However, in terms of the number of wildlife species, Vietnam has dropped to 
the 33rd rank when considering per land area which are prone to defragmentation.3 In Vietnam, 
many keystone species have gone extinct while others are on the brink of extinction. Specifically, 
the Javan Rhinoceros became extinct in 2010 when the last known individual was killed by 
poachers in Cat Tien National Park;4 and the Southern River Terrapin was identified to be extinct in 
the wild.5 Some other animals are also considered to be almost extinct in Vietnam. 

 


One of the key drivers of the precipitous loss of biodiversity and tropical forest degradation in 
Vietnam is the country’s dysfunctional environmental governance system in the context of a rapidly 
evolving national and global economy.6 The combination of inconsistent and contradictory 
governance frameworks, weak and varying enforcement, lack of information, and low overall 
capacity and awareness provides a challenging context in which to address the threats to 
conservation of forests and biodiversity in Vietnam. 

6 USAID. 2013. Vietnam Tropical Forest and Biodiversity Assessment. US Foreign Assistance Act, Section Section 
118/119 Report 

 

According to the GVN’s National Biodiversity Strategy, priority efforts for biodiversity 
conservation include, but are not limited to, strengthening protection of high biodiversity value 
areas; improving the management systems of protected areas and buffer zones; combating illegal 
exploitation and trafficking; monitoring and investigation of endangered and rare species; 
developing models and guidelines for economic valuation of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
and for payments for forest ecological services (PFES); improving policies and institutions to 
implement PFES programs; implementing community participation models for protected area 
management; and developing and enforcing ecological tourism regulations. 

 

The rich biodiversity in Vietnam has historically provided livelihood opportunities, improved 
nutrition and water supply, and decreased impacts from natural disasters. To utilize its natural 
capital for sustainable growth, the GVN has a robust legal framework related to forest and 
biodiversity conservation, covering forest protection and development, land use, environmental 
protection, water resources, fisheries, and biodiversity. Many GVN programs are working to slow 
the pace and scale of ecosystem degradation, including PFES, large scale reforestation programs, 
community co-management and others. Despite this framework and some successes in forest 
conservation, Vietnam’s biodiversity is being lost at an alarming rate and recent studies have raised 
alarm bells about Vietnam’s empty forests, where forest cover remains, but the wildlife and other 
biodiversity it supports are disappearing. 

 

A.3 ACTIVITY PURPOSE 


 

The USAID Biodiversity Conservation activity aims to: 

 

1. Maintain and increase forest quality in high-conservation value provinces and, 
2. Protect and stabilize wildlife populations in national parks and reserves in high-conservation 
value provinces. 


 

A.4 ACTIVITY FOCUS 


 

Focal Interests 

 

This activity will focus on conservation, protection and management of endemic and endangered 
fauna species, as well as two key forest types critical for biodiversity conservation, special use and 
protection forests in targeted provinces of Vietnam. 

 


The GVN divides forests into three categories including special use, protection and production. 
Special use forests, which include both national parks and nature reserves, have the highest level of 
protection and the highest biodiversity value. Protection forests, with a less stringent level of 
protection than special use forests, include forests that provide critical ecosystem services such as 
watershed protection, coastal protection, windbreak and sand break. Production forests are areas 
designated for timber and non-timber forest product production and can be either natural production 
forests or forest plantations. This activity will focus on the protection and management of special 
use forests and to a lesser extent on protection forests. Production forests, due to their lower 
biodiversity value, will not be included in this activity. 

 

Primary Threats 

 

This activity will focus on addressing two primary threats to biodiversity in Vietnam: (1) hunting of 
endemic and endangered faunal species; and, (2) unsustainable natural forest use due to illegal 
logging. To a lesser extent, the activity will also address threats from unsustainable natural forest 
use due to illegal collection of wood and non-timber forest (NTFP) products and conversion of 
natural forests into small scale agriculture. 

 

Key Drivers 

 

A number of drivers have been identified as leading to the primary threats to biodiversity in special 
use and protection forests in Vietnam, though others may be identified as the activity progresses. 

 

While the national poverty rate hovers around 9.8 percent7, the rate is much higher (approximately 
57 percent) in rural and ethnic minority communities in high mountain areas.8 A lack of livelihood 
opportunities, compounded by insecure land-tenure, drives threats to forests and biodiversity in 
these areas. Social and political marginalization, distance from markets, and lack of information and 
funding limit economic options for rural communities and increase their reliance on the natural 
resources around them. In addition to these issues, there is often a lack of awareness and 
understanding of protected area management by communities and their potential role in the 
protection, management and monitoring of biodiversity. 

7 World Bank’s Vietnam Country Profile 

8 Ngo Ha Quyen - Mekong Development Research Institute, Reducing Poverty in Vietnam - Issues, Policies and 
Challenges 

 

Weak and inconsistent enforcement of environmental laws and regulations also drives threats. This 
includes weak application of laws, limited and differing understanding of the objectives and value 
of various laws and policies, inconsistent or weak punishments when laws are enforced and 
inconsistent monitoring. 

 

Low capacity and awareness at all levels contribute to biodiversity loss, as well as understaffing 
(e.g., of protected areas), limited training and technical capacity of staff, insufficient tools and 
technology available to facilitate conservation work, limited finances and budgets, and a lack of 
information and/or data upon which to base management decision-making. Further, the natural 
resources’ sector is particularly susceptible to corruption, including bribery, fraud, and conflicts of 
interest. Weak, or nonexistent, systems for collecting, managing, and sharing biodiversity data, and 


a lack of use of biodiversity data in decision-making further compound the issues created by weak 
governance and enforcement. 

 

Geographic Focus 

 

Remaining natural forests and wildlife are mainly found in the central region and protected areas in 
the central highlands. Quang Nam, Quang Tri, Thua Thien Hue, Quang Binh and Lam Dong, 
provinces where the last globally significant remnants of primary forests still exist, are also where 
the highest levels of biodiversity occur. They are home to an extraordinary array of fauna and flora, 
of which many species are rare, endemic, and endangered. This biodiversity includes large endemic 
mammals, some of which were only discovered as late as the 1990s. These include the saola 
(Pseudoryx nghetinhensis; first discovered in 1992) and the Truong Son muntjac (Muntiacus 
truongsonensis; first discovered in 1997). In addition, Quang Nam and Thua Thien Hue are part of 
a critical transboundary landscape with Xe Sap National Protected Area in Laos, as well as a northsouth 
protected area corridor in Vietnam. 

 

Thus, this activity will be implemented in Vietnam’s high biodiversity provinces including but not 
limited to Thua Thien Hue, Quang Nam, Quang Tri, Quang Binh and Lam Dong to protect the 
global significant wildlife and tree species currently managed in special use forests and protection 
forests. 

 

A.5 ACTIVITY THEORY OF CHANGE 


 

The working theory of change for this activity is that IF 

 

1. Conservation-friendly benefits to forest dependent communities are improved; and if 
2. Management of special use and protection forests is strengthened; and if 
3. Law enforcement systems are more functional; and if 
4. Local demand for wildlife is reduced through behavior change methodologies; 


 

THEN communities and management authorities will be able to better conserve, protect, and 
manage wildlife and forests in focal provinces through reducing threats from wildlife hunting, 
unsustainable natural forest use and natural forest conversion. 

 

A.6 STRATEGIC APPROACHES 


 

The USAID Biodiversity Conservation activity has four mutually reinforcing strategic approaches: 

 

1. Promote Conservation-Friendly Enterprises in Forest Dependent Communities 
2. Strengthen Management of Special Use and Protection Forests 
3. Increase Functionality of Law Enforcement Systems for Forest and Wildlife Crimes 
4. Reduce Local Demand through Behavior Change Methodologies 


 

A.6.1 Strategic Approach (SA)1: Promote Conservation-Friendly Enterprises in Forest 
Dependent Communities 


 


One important aspect of reducing threats to forests and wildlife in focal provinces is to improve 
benefits to forest dependent communities in a way that provides incentives for communities to 
participate in forest and wildlife management. This strategic approach should focus on working 
with the private sector and communities to identify and remove value chain barriers for enterprises 
that have the potential to improve income generation for communities living in and around forests, 
with an emphasis on activities that reduce pressure on forest resources (e.g NTFPs, high-value 
agriculture products, ecotourism) and build a direct connection between communities and cash and 
non-cash benefits from forests. 

 

The theory of change for this strategic approach is that if value chain barriers for conservationfriendly 
enterprises are identified and addressed, the value chain will be scaled in target areas, and 
more individuals will have incomes from conservation-friendly sources. Access to a more 
conservation-friendly source of income will both increase the benefits that individuals and 
communities receive from forest management and will reduce the need to engage in illegal and 
unsustainable extraction of forest and wildlife products. Together with SA 2, increased benefits will 
lead to increased ownership over forest resources and participation of communities in forest and 
wildlife management. 

 

The success of this strategic approach is dependent on which value chains are selected for 
implementation/scaling and proper selection of communities/households that are dependent on 
forests and wildlife to earn a living. For work in a value chain to have an impact on income at a 
sufficient scale to reduce threats to forests and wildlife, the value chain selection needs to be private 
sector-driven to have a buyer/consumer identified and a clear idea of the scaling potential. For the 
purpose of this activity, we define a value chain as the whole range of goods, services, capacities, 
infrastructure and inputs necessary for commodities/activities to move from the producer/service 
provider to the final customer or consumer. These approaches should also take into consideration 
the different roles that women and men play in income-generating enterprises. 

 

Illustrative Results 

● Value chain barriers for enterprises identified through cooperation with communities and 
the private sector (i.e. consumer awareness of quality products, investment, training, 
connections to larger buyers) 
● Value chain barriers for enterprises addressed (i.e. organizing smallholders into 
cooperatives, connecting smallholders to buyers, linking smallholders to financing, 
improved practices) 
● Improved conservation-friendly income generation activities available to forest-dependent 
communities through private sector engagement 
● Value chains for conservation-friendly enterprises scaled in targeted areas 


 

A.6.2 SA 2: Strengthen Management of Special Use and Protection Forests 


 

It has been widely recognized that forest and wildlife are better managed with the active 
participation from forest dependent communities. In Vietnam, the government has taken steps to 
involve communities in forest and wildlife management through hiring communities to patrol 
special use and protection forests and allocating protection forests to communities to manage. 

 


Building on current policies, strengthening government and community management of special use 
and protection forests is a key component of biodiversity conservation in Vietnam. Though the 
level of protection and reason for protection of the forests types are different, they require a similar 
approach whereby the activity should work with communities, local organizations, the private 
sector, and the government management authorities to improve co-management, and address 
women’s low participation in forest management. Co-management should include active 
community participation in forest and wildlife management, increased effective community patrols 
of forests, and improved government management of forests and biodiversity. This activity should 
focus on all three national parks and six national reserves in the five provinces as well as protection 
forests identified by the recipient having the best opportunity for co-management for biodiversity 
conservation. If resources permit, the recipient expands the Activity support to other provinces. 

 

The theory of change for this strategic approach is that if communities’ and governments’ capacity 
and awareness for planning, monitoring and management is improved, then community ownership 
of forests and wildlife will increase (together with SA1), and the government will be more 
empowered to manage forests and biodiversity, which will lead to improved co-management and 
reduction of threats to forests and wildlife. 

 

Illustrative Results 

● Community awareness of forest and wildlife management practices and policies increased 
● Community capacity for planning, monitoring and management increased 
● Forest land allocation decisions improved or increased 
● Community Forest Management plans and Conservation Plans updated and/or developed 
● Effective community patrols of forests increased 
● Capacity and technology of management authorities to monitor forest and biodiversity 
improved 


 

A.6.3 SA 3: Increase Functionality of Law Enforcement Systems for Forest and Wildlife 
Crimes 


 

Law enforcement is a critical element in reducing illegal logging and hunting in protection and 
special use forests. A successful approach to building a functional law enforcement system should 
consider both actors in the system and outside the system that can advocate for action. This 
strategic approach focuses on two areas: (1) working directly with law enforcement actors (e.g. 
police, rangers, prosecutors, judges) to improve detections, arrests, prosecutions, and convictions 
for forest and wildlife crimes; and, (2) using social media and civil-society organizations (CSOs) to 
raise awareness, detect, and encourage action from law enforcement. This strategic approach is 
based on the theory of change that if you have authorities with resources and political will to take 
action then targeted enforcement actions will be taken effectively and will ultimately lead to 
increased risk and reduced profits from forest and wildlife crimes. 

 

This strategic approach focuses on understanding and addressing barriers to law enforcement in the 
five focal provinces and leveraging CSOs to spur action. While there are some areas where there are 
clear needs identified (i.e. coordination between police and rangers; ranger capacity; information 
and monitoring systems for enforcement), there are other areas where the needs/approaches are less 
clear (i.e. link between arrest, prosecutions and convictions). There are also potentially innovative 


solutions to spur action such as using social media pressure to improve enforcement outcomes. This 
strategic approach should be based on a comprehensive assessment of law enforcement barriers to 
ensure that leverage points along the full enforcement chain are being addressed. 

 

Illustrative Results 

● Barriers to improved law enforcement understood 
● Social media attention to forest and wildlife crimes increased 
● CSO resources for and capacity to raise awareness, detect and encourage action from law 
enforcement for forest and wildlife crimes increased 
● Coordination between rangers and police improved 
● Police attention to forest and wildlife crime improved 
● Detection and monitoring of illegal deforestation and wildlife crime increased 


 

A.6.4 SA4: Reduce Local Demand through Behavior Change Methodologies 


 

Forest-dependent communities living near protected areas of the provinces of Quang Tri, Thua 
Thien Hue, Quang Nam, Quang Binh and Lam Dong have been using forests and the biodiversity in 
them for generations, for both food and medicinal purposes. Hunting by local people is done mostly 
through deploying snares in and around protected areas, which indiscriminately catches animals and 
poses a serious threat to wildlife. 

 

This strategic approach should focus on the use of behavior change methodologies to reduce the 
number of individuals hunting in communities in and around special use forests and those 
consuming wildlife (for food and medicine). While hunting and consumption of wildlife are only 
part of the demand for wildlife products, it is an important gap in current USAID Vietnam 
combating wildlife trafficking program (see program linkages section below). 

 

The foundation for this approach is a clear and detailed understanding of who is hunting and who is 
consuming wildlife and the motivation behind their hunting and consumption - including an 
understanding of the gender dimension behind wildlife hunting and consumption. This information 
is critical to understanding and removing barriers to behavior change and to developing, testing and 
scaling targeted messages. The theory of change is that if the audience receives the correct 
messages then they will express the desired knowledge and attitudes, which will lead to the desired 
behavior change. If the strategy is successful, social norms will change consistent with the 
messages, and fewer individuals in communities in and around special use forests will hunt and 
consume wildlife. 

 

Illustrative Results 

● Motivation for hunting and consumption of wildlife understood 
● Potential barriers for desired behavior change understood 
● Barriers for desired behavior change removed or addressed 
● Target audience and messengers identified 
● Messages developed, presented, tested, and scaled 


 

A.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES 


 


The success and financial, ecological and social sustainability of this activity is dependent upon 
eight important principles: 

 

● Partnership with the GVN - As with all work in Vietnam, the success of this Activity will 
rest on a strong partnership and collaboration with the GVN at the national and local level. 
● Engagement with local communities and local organizations - Local communities living in 
and around special use and protection forests can be partners in conservation if they are 
engaged effectively and seen as partners in implementation. Local non-government 
organizations are also considered as important stakeholders for the implementation of this 
activity through collective action approaches. 
● Private sector engagement - The private sector should drive the approach to identifying 
sustainable value chains to ensure there is a market and demand to achieve scalability. Three 
key questions for private sector engagement are: (1) What are the key areas of the activity 
that would benefit most from private sector contributions and how would these private 
sector contributions help achieve activity goals faster/cheaper/more efficiently/more 
inclusively? (2) What value proposition would be used to leverage private sector resources 
(financial and other) and innovation to contribute to the activity’s strategic approaches? (3) 
How would the value of leveraged public-private partnership contributions be measured and 
what is the anticipated value of these contributions? 
● Thinking and working politically (TWP) and political economy analysis (PEA) - 
Conservation involves a diverse group of stakeholders with diverse motivations and requires 
a TWP approach. The core principles of TWP are: 1) strong political analysis, insight and 
understanding, with a focus on institutions, interests and incentives; 2) nuanced appreciation 
of, and responses to, the local context, working through and empowering domestic networks 
of stakeholders and coalitions; and 3) flexibility and adaptability in project design and 
implementation, punctuated by planned exercises to pause and reflect for critical 
assessments of project activities. 
● Innovation and technology - The activity should utilize available innovative tools to 
improve the capacities of authorities in law enforcement, monitoring and implementation, 
and engagement with communities in forest management as well as awareness raising and 
behavior change campaigns. 
● Elevating gender and social inclusion - The activity should take into account sensitivity 
towards specific needs and impacts of women and vulnerable individuals and populations. 
This activity will work with multiple ethnic minority groups, whose cultures are different: 
working strategies need to be culturally sensitive. 
● Focusing on impact and scalability - The activity must reach scale in order to successfully 
reduce threats to biodiversity. So it is critical that prospective partners should take this into 
serious consideration. 
● Collaborating, learning and adapting (CLA) - Development efforts yield more effective 
results if they are coordinated and collaborative; test promising, new approaches in a 
continuous yet also rapid, targeted search for generating improvements and efficiencies; and 
build on what works and eliminate what doesn‘t. See Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
section for more details on CLA. 


 

A.8 MONITORING, EVALUATION & LEARNING 


 


The Recipient will be expected to employ an evidence-based adaptive management approach based 
on the Open Standards for the Practice of Conservation. The approach must be grounded in up-todate 
research, assessments and project experience that assesses the effectiveness of project actions 
to reduce threats to forests and wildlife. This evidence base will feed into an overarching theory of 
change that outlines the basic elements and actions that need to be in place to achieve the project 
purpose. Description of this theory must clearly articulate how the actions proposed will achieve 
biodiversity conservation objectives. 

 

Detailed Monitoring Evaluation and Learning (MEL) planning, including refining the broad theory 
of change, and how this broad theory will inform the development of testable actions that address 
specific problems, will be defined and drafted during program start-up. 

 

Performance Indicators 

 

The Recipient should have sufficient knowledge of issues facing biodiversity in Vietnam to be able 
to design effective biodiversity conservation activities, set out-year targets, and track biodiversity 
loss reductions. 

 

The Recipient will be required to report on the following indicators listed in Table 1 in order to 
inform the Project MEL plan. The Recipient can consult the Agreement Officer’s Representative 
(AOR) should changes to these indicators need to be made. The Recipient will also be responsible 
for monitoring participation and success in the activity by women, men, and ethnically or 
geographically vulnerable individuals and communities. They should consult the AOR regarding 
collection of data for other required when applicable USAID Biodiversity standard indicators are 
pertinent to the work plan. 

 

Table 1. Required indicators for reporting. 

 

 

Outcome Statement 

Custom Indicator 

Standard Indicator 

Disaggregates 

SA 1: Promote 
Conservation- 
Friendly Enterprises 
in Forest Dependent 
Communities 

By 2025, number of 
individuals in targeted 
areas that have 
increased benefits from 
conservation-friendly 
enterprises increased 
by X individuals from 
the baseline. 

Number of 
individuals in 
targeted areas with 
increased economic 
benefits from 
conservation-friendly 
enterprises 

EG.10.2-3 Number of 
people with improved 
economic benefits derived 
from sustainable natural 
resource management and/or 
biodiversity conservation as 
a result of USG assistance 

Monetary or nonmonetary 


SA 2: Strengthen 
Management of 
Special Use and 
Protection Forests 

By 2025, X number of 
hectares are under 
improved NRM 
conditions as a result of 
community forest 
management and 
wildlife management. 

Number of hectares 
under improved NRM 
conditions as a result 
of community forest 
management and 
wildlife management. 

EG.10.2-2 Number of 
hectares of biologically 
significant areas under 
improved natural resource 
management as a result of 
USG assistance 

Existing or new 
hectares 
managed by 
communities; 
Biologically 
significant or 
non- biologically 
significant area 




SA 3: Increase 
Functionality of Law 
Enforcement System 
for Forests and 
Wildlife Crimes 

By 2025, number of 
CSO engaged in 
raising awareness, 
detecting, and 
encouraging action 
from law enforcement 
for forest and wildlife 
crimes increased by X 
from baseline data. 

Number of CSOs 
engaged in raising 
awareness, detection, 
and encouraging 
action from law 
enforcement for 
forest and wildlife 
crimes 

 

Raising 
awareness, 
detecting crime 
or encouraging 
government 

By 2025, number of 
forest and wildlife 
crime arrests and 
prosecutions in 
targeted provinces 
increased by X from 
baseline data. 

Number of forest and 
wildlife crime arrests 
and prosecutions in 
targeted provinces 

 

Arrest or 
prosecution 

SA 4: Reduce Local 
Demand for Wildlife 
through Behavior 
Change 
Methodologies 

By 2025, there is an X 
percentage point 
change in the selected 
behavior(s) of the 
target audience from 
baseline data. 

Percentage point 
change in selected 
behavior(s) of the 
target audience. 

 

Selected 
behavior; Target 
Audience 



 

A.9 COLLABORATION, LEARNING AND ADAPTING 


 

The Recipient is expected to contribute to the Vietnam mission’s commitment to a multifaceted 
collaborating, learning and adapting (CLA) approach to development. As stated in guiding principle 
number 7, the CLA approach is based on the understanding that development efforts yield more 
effective results if they are coordinated and collaborative; test promising, new approaches in a 
continuous yet also rapid, targeted search for generating improvements and efficiencies; and build 
on what works and eliminate what doesn‘t. It is also understood that CLA takes into account 
programmatic learning and shifts generated by the activity (outward-generating) as well as those 
adopted by the activity from external learning sources. USAID also anticipates that a strong focus 
on adaptive management techniques as expressed through staffing skills, structure and culture, 
business processes, and stakeholder engagement will be particularly important in the 
implementation of this activity, in order to track and adjust to the opportunities to operationally 
integrate with other activities working in related efforts. Thus, USAID anticipates a CLA approach 
that tailors CLA to the needs and opportunities of this activity, while leaving open options for 
future evolution in its interpretation and application. 

 

● Collaborating: Engage in active collaboration with other key in-country partners to share 
knowledge around assessments, emerging research, lessons learned, and evaluations, and 
jointly develop action plans for integrating learning resulting from these activities into 
improved program implementation. 


 

● Learning: Specifically define how innovative and dynamic learning agendas will be 
developed and implemented with the teams and the Mission as a whole. Hold annual pause 
and reflect workshops to identify promising practices, work collaboratively to overcome 
implementation obstacles, and address changing conditions. Results should be used to 



inform upcoming year work plans and activity design across multiple stakeholders, and 
captured and shared broadly. 


 

● Adapting: Engage in periodic reflection activities using approaches such as after-action 
reviews to identify, capture, and act upon lessons learned in technical, cross-cutting, and 
management activities. The Recipient will demonstrate adaptability that is informed by 
knowledge gained through learning, and recognize behaviors and incentives necessary to 
create change. Knowledge gained through learning will influence decision making, resource 
allocation, and adaptation to contextual shifts. Application of new knowledge to 
implementation decisions will be reflected in annual work plans, activity reports, and the 
Activity MEL Plan. 


 

A.10 PROGRAM LINKAGES 


 

USAID/Vietnam is currently developing its Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) 
for 2020-2025. The core goal of the strategy is to contribute to an “Open, prosperous, and secure 
Vietnam that is effective and inclusive in tackling its own development challenges.” The CDCS has 
three Development Objectives, in which Development Objective 3 (DO3) is “Environmental 
Security Improved.” This DO has four immediate results (IRs) and this Activity contributes to the 
achievement of IR2 - Declines in wildlife populations and amount of forest degradation reduced. 

 

Relevant USAID/Vietnam Programming 

 

● New Sustainable Forest Management activity9: This Activity will be expected to coordinate 
and align with a new USAID Sustainable Forest Management Activity. The USAID 
Sustainable Forest Management activity aims to increase the application of sustainable 
practices and implementation of forestry laws and regulations in the management of 
protection and production forests to reduce and sequester carbon emissions. The sustainable 
forest management activity will be implemented at both a national and provincial level. Two 
provinces where the activity is likely to work are Quang Nam and Quang Tri. This activity 
should pay special attention to coordination around: (1) any work in Quang Nam and Quang 
Tri where both activities will be working; (2) initial assessment where there may be areas of 
overlap such as value chain barriers analysis; and, (3) engagement with value chain 
buyers/consumers where the two activities have similar value chains. 


9 Currently, USAID/Vietnam is soliciting at present for two activities - Biodiversity Conservation (this NOFO) and 
Sustainable Forest Management (procured separately under a contract mechanism). The Biodiversity Conservation 
Activity focus is maintaining and increasing forest quality; and protecting and stabilizing wildlife populations in 
national parks and nature reserves while the Sustainable Forest Management Activity focuses on reducing emissions 
from deforestation, which predominantly occurs in production forests (outside of national parks and nature reserves) 
due to the high pressure from land conversion. 

 

● USAID Saving Species: USAID Saving Species is a five-year combating wildlife trafficking 
activity, whose purpose is to reduce the pressure of wildlife crime on endangered and 
threatened species. The activity will accomplish this by reducing consumer demand for and 
consumption of illegal wildlife and wildlife products, strengthening wildlife law 
enforcement and prosecution, and improving and harmonizing the legal frameworks for 



wildlife crime. USAID Saving Species will be implemented through September 2021 in 
partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. 


 

● Green Annamintes: USAID Green Annamites is a 4.5-year integrated biodiversity 
conservation and climate change activity. The purpose of this activity is to assist Vietnam’s 
transition to climate smart, low emission, and resilient development that protects people, 
landscapes, and biodiversity in Vietnam’s priority forested provinces. USAID Green 
Annamites have been implemented in direct partnership with Provincial People's 
Committees of Thua Thien Hue and Quang Nam Provinces. This will be implemented 
through December 2020. 


 

USAID/RDMA Programming 

 

● Wildlife Asia: USAID/RDMA Wildlife Asia aims to address wildlife trafficking as a 
transnational crime in Southeast Asia and China. Specifically, this activity will support Asia 
regional initiatives of USAID by sharing best practices and enabling policies of participating 
countries including Vietnam to increase forest biodiversity and protect wildlife populations 
in high conservation value areas. 


 

A.11 GENDER CONSIDERATIONS 


 

USAID conducted a gender analysis to inform the development of this Activity. Identified gender 
gaps and general required actions are presented in the table below. However, it is recognized that 
the Activity will work in locations with high cultural and social diversity. Thus, the recipient must 
conduct a more detailed gender analysis prior to or at an early stage of the Activity implementation. 
The recipient must use information acquired from the detailed analysis to develop a gender action 
plan or gender strategy describing how gender will be integrated into all phases of the Activity 
implementation. 

 

Gender gap / issues 

Required actions 

Women’s participation and leadership in biodiversity 
conservation and forest management agencies in 
Vietnam is generally very low. Women are also underrepresented 
in biodiversity conservation activities 
including biodiversity patrolling. 

Promoting women’s participation in 
biodiversity conservation and forest 
management agencies and in 
community-based biodiversity 
patrolling 

There is a clear labor division in forest dwelling 
communities. In general, men are perceived as the ones 
responsible for representing families in events and 
meetings and/or dealing with other stakeholders, for 
instance government agencies. Women are responsible 
for taking care of children and housework. There is clear 
evidence about the roles and responsibilities between 
men and women in the mountainous ethnic minority 
communities in the conduct of livelihood activities. 

Increasing awareness of the 
different gender roles of men and 
women in livelihood activities and 
encouraging the participation of 
both sexes in all aspects of 
conservation enterprises related 
activities. 




Unquestioned gender roles limit the opportunity for one 
sex in the work that the other sex dominates. It might 
also imply unequal benefit sharing among men and 
women (e.g. training opportunities, potential incomes). 

There are some gender issues related to land tenure in 
the agroforestry sector. Women experienced difficulties 
in both legal and traditional rights over land and forest. 
This creates barriers for women when they are required 
to provide collateral for assessing loans, securing a 
viable divorce settlement and claiming rights to land 
when widowed. 

Exploring opportunities to improve 
land use rights so that women can 
access loans. This will help them to 
increase their incomes through 
engaging in conservation 
enterprises activities 

The Government of Vietnam has women empowerment 
and gender equality policies in place; however these 
policies have not been consistently implemented from 
commune to commune due to varying levels of expertise 
and training in this area. 

Exploring opportunities to support 
GVN in implementing their 
existing women empowerment and 
gender equality policies. 



 

 

 

 

 [END OF SECTION A] 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1 ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 


 

Subject to funding availability, USAID intends to provide up to US $38,000,000 in total USAID 
funding. 

 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this NOFO. USAID reserves 
the right to fund any one or none of the application submitted. 

 

B.2 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 


 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five years, starting from [actual date to be filled in at 
the time of award]. 

 

B.3 SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 


 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID/Vietnam anticipates a close working partnership with the 
successful Applicant for this activity to assist in achieving the objectives. The specific areas of 
USAID involvement will include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Approval of the Recipient’s Annual Implementation Plans by the designated Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR); 


 

2. Approval of specified Key Personnel: Key Personnel positions will be identified and stated in 
the award. The Recipient shall request prior approval from the USAID Agreement Officer 
(AO) for the replacement of key personnel or changes in the key personnel positions; 


 

3. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation: The Recipient must request prior 
written concurrence from the AOR and obtain approval from the AO before entering into any 
sub-awards under the performance of this agreement; and 


 

4. Approval of the Recipient’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan by the AOR. 


 

B.4 AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 


 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937. 

 

B.5 NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the USAID Biodiversity 
Conservation Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 
responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective 
administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient 


will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying 
agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 
award profit to prime recipients and subrecipients under assistance instruments. However, while 
profit is not allowed for sub-awards, the prohibition does not apply when the recipient acquires 
goods and services in accordance with 2 CFR 200.317 -326, “Procurement Standards.” Forgone 
profit does not qualify as cost-share. 

 

Each applicant must be found to be a responsible entity before receiving an award. The Agreement 
Officer (AO) may determine that a pre-award survey is required in accordance with ADS 303.3.9.1 
to determine whether the applicant has the necessary organization, experience, accounting and 
operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with established U.S. Government standards, laws, and 
regulations. Applicants who do not currently meet all USAID requirements for systems and controls 
may still be eligible under special award considerations and should not be discouraged from 
applying. USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received 
financial assistance from USAID. The prime recipient is encouraged to promote involvement of 
“underutilized” partners and local organizations in the implementation of this activity. 

 

C.2 COST SHARING OR MATCHING 

 

USAID has established a minimum required cost share of 10% of the total estimated cost for this 

activity, which is approximately US $3.8 million [exact amount to be inserted by the time of award] 
to be contributed throughout the life of the activity. Such funds may be mobilized from the 
recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors; host governments; and local 
organizations, communities and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to 
implementation of activities at the country level, but not from other USG funding sources. This may 
include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or other facilities or equipment which may 
be used for the activity, provided by the partner. For guidance on cost sharing in grants and 
cooperative agreements, please see the ADS 303.3.10 and 2 CFR 200.306 for U.S. NGOs. For non- 
US NGOs, all cost sharing would be subject to the Required as Applicable Provision “Cost 
Sharing” in the Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 303, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental Organizations. 

 

C.3 ELIGIBILITY OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR USAID FINANCING 

 

• Applicable Rules 


 

The recipient must comply with USAID’s Rules for Procurement of Commodities and Services 
Financed by USAID in 22 CFR 228 in the procurement and long-term lease (as defined in 22 CFR 
228.01) of goods and services with USAID funds. These rules govern the source of USAIDfinanced 
commodities and the nationality of suppliers of USAID-financed commodities and 


services, which must be in a country that is included in the authorized geographic code. These rules 
apply to the recipient’s procurement contracts (as defined in 2 CFR 200) with vendors and to 
subcontracts at all tiers under the recipient’s procurement contracts. 

 

• Sub-Awards 


 

These rules do not apply to sub-awards (as defined in 2 CFR 200.92), but do apply to the 
procurement and long-term lease of goods and services by sub-recipients (as defined in 2 CFR 
200.93) at all tiers, and to those sub-recipients’ procurement contracts and subcontracts with 
vendors at all tiers. These rules do not apply to procurement or long-term lease of goods and 
services with cost-sharing or program income funds. 

 

• Restricted Commodities 


 

“Restricted Commodities” are certain agricultural commodities, motor vehicles (excluding driver 
service), pharmaceuticals, condoms and contraceptives, pesticides, used equipment, and non-local 
purchase of fertilizer. Special rules apply to restricted commodities, and are described in ADS 
312.3.3. 

 

C.4 ELIGIBILITY OF ACTIVITIES UNDER USAID’S ENVIRONMENTAL 
REGULATIONS 

 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental sustainability as 
a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate is 
codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), which, in part, require 
that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 
Recipient environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are 
specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under this CA will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 
Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 
(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation.”) 

An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) Asia 20-013 (Attachment D) has been approved for 
the Forest and Wildlife, which covers activities expected to be implemented under this agreement. 
USAID has determined that a Negative Determination with conditions applies to the following 


proposed seven classes of activities. This indicates that if these activities are implemented subject to 
the specified conditions, they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the environment. 
The applicant shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be 
funded under this NOFO. 

1. Support farmers to apply FSC standards 
2. Pilot and demonstrate conservation-friendly income generation activities to forest-dependent 
communities through private sector engagement 
3. Value chains for conservation-friendly enterprises scaled in target areas 
4. Increase forest land allocation 
5. Develop Community Forest Management and Conservation Plans 
6. Increase the participation of community in patrolling forests 
7. Implement Carbon PFES policy 


 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in collaboration 
with the USAID Cognizant Technical Officer and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau 
Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities under this 
CA to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation. 

 

If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 

The recipient shall prepare an Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) describing 
how the recipient will, in specific terms, implement conditions that apply to the seven proposed 
classes of activities within the scope of the award. 

The EMMP shall include monitoring the implementation of the conditions and their effectiveness. 
The completed EMMP shall be integrated into the initial work plan; and into subsequent annual 
work plans. The recipient shall make any necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order 
to minimize adverse impacts to the environment. 

 

C.5 LIMITATIONS ON SUBMISSIONS 

 

Each applicant is limited to one application submission under this NOFO as the prime Applicant. 
There is no limitation on being included as a potential sub-awardee across multiple applications. The 
use of exclusive teaming arrangements is discouraged. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1 AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT 


 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr. Bruce Gelband 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Vietnam 

15/F Tung Shing Square, 2 Ngo Quyen 

Hanoi, Vietnam 

Email: bgelband@usaid.gov 

 

The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Huyen Dang 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Vietnam 

15/F Tung Shing Square, 2 Ngo Quyen 

Hanoi, Vietnam 

Email: hdang@usaid.gov 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and any 
subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All applications must be submitted 
according to instructions contained in this NOFO. 

 

In order to maintain a fair and transparent funding opportunity, USAID maintains strict guidelines 
on who within USAID may be contacted regarding applications or questions about the opportunity. 
Applicants may only contact USAID via the email address provided in this NOFO. Failure to 
comply with the USAID points of contact guidance mandated in the NOFO may disqualify the 
Applicant(s). 

 

D.2 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


 

Questions and requests for clarification regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to the 
Agency Points of Contact above no later than the due date and time provided on the cover page. 

 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on www.grants.gov, if 
that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to 
any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov for any amendments. 

 

D.3 SUBMISSION DATE AND TIME 


 


Applications must be submitted by email to points of contact stated in Section D.1 before the 
respective due dates and times on the cover page. Applicants must ensure that the applications are 
received at USAID/Vietnam in their entirety. No additions or modifications to submitted 
applications will be accepted after the closing date and time. Late applications will be considered 
only if the Agreement Officer determines it is in the Government’s interest. Each email submission 
may not exceed 15 MB in size. 

 

Hard copies, whether hand delivered or by postal mail, will not be accepted. 

 

If you do not receive an email confirmation for receipt of applications, please contact USAID at the 
email address noted above. 

 

D.4 APPLICANTS RESPONSIVENESS 


 

All applications received by the closing date and time will be reviewed for responsiveness to the 
specifications outlined in these guidelines and the application format. Section E: Application 
Review Information addresses technical evaluation application criteria. Applicants must review, 
understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may lead to the 
disqualification of an application. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary 
documentation is complete and received on time. 

 

D.5 APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 


 

Submission of Applications 

 

a. Applications must be submitted in two separate volumes: (a) Technical Application and (b) 
Cost/ Business Application, each of which must be organized by the headings set forth below 
and must include the information described below. The Technical application must address 
technical aspects only while the Cost Application must present the costs, and address risk and 
other related issues. 


 

b. The subject line of application submissions must reference the NOFO No. 72044020RFA00004 
and the title of the activity: USAID Biodiversity Conservation. The applicant must indicate in 
the subject line of the email whether the email relates to the technical application or cost 
application and indicate if multiple emails are sent (e.g. “1 of 4”). 


 

c. Applications in response to this NOFO must be in English, and in U.S. dollars. 


 

Restriction on Disclosure and Use of Data 

 

a. Applicants that include in their applications data that they do not want disclosed to the public 
for any purpose, or used by the Government except for evaluation purposes shall: 

 

i. Mark the title page with the following legend: “This application includes data that shall 
not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed - 
in whole or in part - for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, 



a grant or cooperative agreement is awarded to this Applicant as a result of - or in 
connection with - the submission of this data, the Government shall have the right to 
duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data 
if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets [insert numbers or other identification of sheets]”; and 


 

ii. Mark each page containing restricted data with the following legend: “Use or disclosure 
of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 


 

b. Applicants are advised that it is anticipated that the successful program narrative, submitted as 
part of the technical application, will become the Program Description of the cooperative 
agreement awarded as a result of this NOFO. Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act of 
1981, the public is entitled to request information from Agency award files. As a general rule, 
information will be disclosed except: 

 

i. Information submitted in response to this NOFO, prior to award of the grant, or 
modifications or revisions thereto. 
ii. Information properly classified or administratively controlled by USAID. 
iii. Information specifically exempted from disclosure under the Freedom of Information 
Act. 


 

c. Upon award of the cooperative agreement resulting from this NOFO, USAID will disclose, use, 
or duplicate any information submitted in response to this NOFO to the extent provided in the 
award and as described in Section F of this NOFO, and as required by the Freedom of 
Information Act. 

 

Pre-Award Audits/Surveys and Discussions 

 

USAID reserves the right to perform a pre-award audit/survey which may include, but is not limited 
to: (1) interviews with individuals to establish their ability to perform award duties under project 
conditions; (2) a review of the Applicant's financial condition, business and personnel policies and 
procedures, etc.; and (3) site visits to the Applicant's institution. However, it must be understood 
that USAID undertakes no obligation to perform any of the foregoing elements. Accordingly, 
Applicants should submit their best and most complete application initially. 

 

Inconsistencies between this NOFO and 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200/ADS 303 

 

In case of any disagreements or discrepancies between the terms and conditions of this NOFO and 2 
CFR 700 and 2 CFR 200 or ADS 303, the latter shall prevail unless any such conflicting terms and 
conditions of this NOFO are expressly and specifically stated to be an approved deviation from 2 
CFR 700, 2 CFR 200 or ADS 303. 

 

Authority to Commit USAID 

 


The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit USAID to the expenditure 
of public funds. No costs allocable to the proposed award will be reimbursed by USAID before 
receipt of either a fully executed grant or cooperative agreement, or a specific written authorization 
from the Agreement Officer. 

 

D.6 TECHNICAL APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS 


 

(a) General 


 

Applicants must organize the application to follow the technical evaluation criteria specified in 
Section E. The page length for the application shall not exceed twenty (25) pages. Within these 
pages, the executive summary shall not exceed three (3) pages. The only annexes to be evaluated 
are listed hereunder and are not subject to the page limitation. 

 

Technical application must be organized in the following manner: 

 

I. Executive Summary – not to exceed three (3) pages 
II. Activity Description 
III. Institutional Experience 
IV. Key Personnel and Staffing Plan 
V. Annexes - See below 


 

Annex A - Resume and Letter of Commitment (Chief of Party) 
Annex B - Staffing Pattern/ Organizational Chart, including title and position description of 
proposed key personnel positions. 


 

(b) Limitations 


 

USAID will not evaluate information submitted in excess of the above stated page limits. The 
Technical Application shall be written in Time New Roman Font, 12-point size. The 12-point size 
requirement does not apply to footnotes, tables, graphs and charts, though these should be used 
sparingly and not in place of basic text. Applicants shall use only 8.5 inch by 11-inch (210mm by 
297mm) paper, with margins no less than one inch on each border. Number each page 
consecutively. 

 

Note: A page in the Technical Application that contains a table, chart, graph, etc., not otherwise 
explicitly excluded per the instruction, is subject to the page limitation. 

 

Not included in this page limitation are the following: 

 

• Cover Page – the Applicant must provide with the following information on the Cover Page: 


 

i. Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
ii. Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 



alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone 
number and email address); 
iii. Activity Title; 
iv. Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 
v. Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303.6). 
vi. DUNS number 


 

• Table of Contents 
• Acronym List 
• Annexes (as specified in (a) above) 


 

Information from annexes should be summarized in the narrative of the Technical Application, as 
appropriate for the context of the narrative. 

 

(c) Content of the Technical Application 

Technical applications should include the sections and content below and should be directed at the 
program as described in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description. The technical application will 
be the critical item of consideration in selection of an Applicant for an award. The information 
provided in the technical application must be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The 
technical application must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the goals of this program and specify the specific results to be achieved. The merit review 
criteria set forth in Section E. Application Review Information of this NOFO indicate the relative 
importance of each criterion so that Applicants will know which areas require emphasis in the 
preparation of the technical application. Applicants are advised that lack of completeness or 
superficiality of the application may constitute grounds for excluding it from consideration. 

It is anticipated that a portion of the successful application will become the Program Description for 
the award resulting from this NOFO. Thus, applications submitted in response to this NOFO 
should, in addition to being responsive to the requirements described herein, be written in the active 
voice and in results-oriented terms in order to address what is proposed to be done; why it is 
proposed to be done, how it is proposed to be done, who will do it, where it will be done, when it 
will be done, and the anticipated results and impact. 

 

The Technical Application includes the information set forth below: 

 

1. Executive Summary (maximum 3 pages) 














 

A succinct summary of the Applicant’s overall activity description. 

 

2. Activity Description [See Section E.2] 














 

The Activity Description should convincingly articulate the Applicant’s proposed activities 
to accomplishing the four stated strategic approaches presented in the Funding Opportunity 
Description, focusing on what is technically and politically feasible within the five years of 


the Program. The Applicant should not merely repeat what is already described in the 
Program Description but should convincingly describe how the Applicant proposes to 
achieve the Activity Purpose (See A.3) and Strategic Approaches (A.6), detailing the results 
to be achieved and methodology employed. The Applicant should demonstrate why the 
approach proposed is the most effective means to realize the Activity Purpose and how the 
Guiding Principles (See A.7) will be leveraged to achieve sustainable results. 

 

As part of the articulation of the approach, the Applicant should also incorporate how the 
proposed approach will effectively compliment other USAID activities. Lastly, the 
Applicant should describe how they will leverage the expertise of underutilized and local 
organizations, and provide illustrative examples of organizations with whom the Applicant 
may partner to successfully accomplish the activity purpose. 

 

3. Institutional Experience [See Section E.2] 














 

The Applicant must demonstrate experience in biodiversity conservation activities. For the 
purposes of this solicitation, “biodiversity conservation activities” include those activities 
implemented during the last five (5) years that convincingly demonstrate: 

 

• Engagement with stakeholders, including protected area management authorities, 
NGOs and local communities, to develop biodiversity conservation plans and support 
the implementation of those plans, which include biodiversity monitoring, building 
conservation capacity, reducing demand for wildlife and wildlife products. 
• Development of conservation friendly enterprises in partnership with private 
companies to increase incomes for communities living in and around protected areas 
using value chain approach. 
• Increasing functionality of law enforcement systems for forest and wildlife crimes. 






 

In providing examples of work as outlined in above, the Applicant must precisely 
describe its specific role(s) in implementing the experience described. The Applicant 
must articulate the results achieved and how the described experience will enhance the 
likelihood of successful implementation of the proposed Activity Description. Note that 
only the experience of the Prime Applicant should be included. 

 

4. Key Personnel and Staffing Plan [See Section E.2] 














 

a. Key Personnel: 
















 

USAID/Vietnam determined that five (5) personnel positions are key for this award, 
including Chief of Party. For this RFA, the Applicant need only identify by name the 
proposed Chief of Party. No other individual should be identified nor will be evaluated. 

 

The following skills and expertise should be largely found, collectively, within the Key 
Personnel: 

 

• Experience and familiarity working in conservation in Vietnam 



• Knowledge of the legal and institutional context and frameworks for forest and 
wildlife management/conservation in Vietnam 
• Connections to and familiarity with local organizations in Vietnam working in 
conservation and community development 
• Knowledge of and experience with wildlife and forest conservation, specifically with 
wildlife management, wildlife hunting/poaching, forest management, illegal logging 
and wildlife and forest monitoring techniques 
• Knowledge of and experience with private sector engagement to develop and scale 
sustainable value chains 
• Knowledge of and experience with methods and tools to improve law enforcement 
capacity and coordination for monitoring, detection, arrests, prosecutions, 
convictions and penalties 
• Knowledge of and experience with analytical tools to assess cultural behavior, 
incentive structures, power relations, and other factors shaping behavior, political 
economy and institutions 
• Skills and knowledge in community engagement, behavior change communications, 
strategic communications, social media and knowledge management 
• Monitoring, evaluation and learning expertise with a strong focus on adaptive 
management 
• Gender and social inclusion expertise 


 

In the Annex A, the Applicant must include a resume for the proposed Chief of Party. The 
submitted resume must include a minimum of five references with current email and 
telephone number contact information. It should be noted that USAID reserves the right to 
solicit references beyond those submitted. The resume may not exceed five pages and must, 
at a minimum, identify the start year and month and end year and month for each 
former/current employment listed. Also, a signed letter of commitment must be submitted 
for the Key Person proposed, indicating (a) his/her intention to serve for a stated term of the 
service [state the period in the letter], and (b) agreement to the compensation level which 
corresponds to the levels set forth in the cost application. 

 

Notwithstanding the proposed Chief of Party, Applicants are expected to maximize the use 
of local Vietnamese labor to leverage locally available qualified expertise. 

 

b. Staffing Plan: 
















 

Applicants must propose a staffing plan that convincingly demonstrates the Applicant’s 
ability to successfully implement the Activity. The Applicant must describe how the 
proposed Staffing Plan (including proposed COP) will ensure successful implementation 
and the approach by which local Vietnamese labor and expertise will be maximized. 

 

The Applicant must describe the division of roles and responsibilities between the applicant, 
subgrantees and other resource organizations, if any, in implementing the activity. The 
Applicant shall describe staffing roles for any proposed subawardees with defined lines of 
management, supervisory authority, and technical responsibility. The staffing plan shall 


clearly and logically address how consultants will be used to complement full-time project 
staff and whether they will be local or expatriate staff. 

 

In Annex B, the Applicant must provide an organizational chart depicting its staffing plan 
including the chain of command among staff. The chart must specify which personnel, if 
any, are employed by a subawardee. 

 

The title and position description of each of the five (5) key personnel positions proposed 
(including the Chief of Party) must be included in Annex B. 

 

D.7 COST APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS 


 

The cost application must be submitted separately from the technical application. While no page 
limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible 
while still providing the necessary details. The cost (business) application must illustrate the entire 
period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

The cost application must contain the following sections: 

 

1. Cover Page 
2. SF 424 Forms 
3. Budget and Budget Narrative 
4. Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 
5. Duns and Bradstreet and SAM Registration 
6. Funding Restrictions 
7. Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the Recipient 
8. History of Performance 
1. Cover Page 














 

The Cost Application Cover Page must contain the same information as the Technical Application 
Cover Page. 

 

2. SF 424 Form(s) 














The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series; SF-424, SF-424A 
and SF-424B. Standard Forms and instructions can be found at the following link: 

https://www.grants.gov/forms/sf-424-family.html. 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

3. Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

While there is no page limit for this portion, the Applicant is encouraged to be as concise as 
possible, but still provide the following necessary details: 

 


• The budget to be presented under Cost/Business Application should relate to results specified 
in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description, and delineate the cost inputs or each result, 
and a disaggregation between the USAID (Federal Share) and cost-share (Non-federal share) 
of the total program cost. 


 

• The proposed budget should provide cost estimates for the management of the program 
(including program monitoring, baseline assessments and assessments for environmental 
compliance). Applicant should minimize their administrative and support costs for managing 
the project to maximize the funds available for project activities. 


 

• The breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to costs of, if applicable, 
headquarters, regional, country, and/or local offices. 


 

• The breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization or subcontractor/ 
subgrantee involved in the program. 


 

• The costs associated with external, expatriate technical assistance and those associated with 
local in-country technical assistance. 


 

• The breakdown of the financial and in-kind (cost share) contributions of all organizations 
involved in implementing this Activity. 


 

• Potential contributions of non-USAID or private commercial donors to this agreement. 


 

• A procurement plan for commodities. 


 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum (all 
formulas must be displayed, and the budget must not be locked): 

 

i. Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the Activity. 
ii. Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to determine 
that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the applicant’s 
Activity and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 
Subpart E. 
iii. Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out by 
budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the Activity. 


 

Budget Narrative: Applicants must provide a narrative justifying the unit rates for each cost 
category proposed with supporting information as further specified under the following cost 
categories. Any assumptions should be clearly stated. Applicants should keep in mind that it is their 
responsibility to ensure that the information provided is sufficient to provide a basis for USAID to 
determine that the costs proposed are reasonable and realistic. 

 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 


 

• Personnel Salaries and Wages: Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. Direct salaries, wages and allowances must include 
position title, salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors. Allowances, when 
proposed, should be broken down by specific type and by person. Allowances should be in 
accordance with the applicant’s policies and the applicable regulations and policies. Explain 
assumptions in the Budget Narrative. If the organization has standing policies across all 
projects for annual salary escalations that exceed current inflation rates, those policies and 
the effective date of those policies must be provided with the application. The Applicant 
must also confirm that the policy applies to all staff across all projects. 


 

• Fringe Benefits: If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate that has been approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, such rate should be used and evidence of its approval should 
be provided. If a fringe benefit rate has not been so approved, the application should propose 
a rate and explain how the rate was determined. If the latter is used, the narrative should 
include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., unemployment 
insurance, workers compensation, health and life insurance, retirement, etc.) and the costs of 
each, expressed in dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

• Travel, Transportation and Per Diem: Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an 
attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

• Equipment & Supplies - Procurement or Rental of Goods Services, and Real Property must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any 
rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable 
property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

• Subawards: Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is 
a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

• Contractual - refers to contract agreements the applicant anticipates having with other 
organizations to contract out portions of the activity (this does not apply to the acquisition of 
supplies, material, equipment, or general support services). 


 

• Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be 
provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis 
of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the cost 



share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the 
resulting award. 


 

• Other Direct Costs: This includes communications, report preparation costs, passports and 
visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, insurance (other than insurance included in the 
Applicant's fringe benefits), office rent abroad, etc. The Applicant should indicate the 
subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship 
to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. The narrative should provide 
a breakdown and support for all and each other direct costs. 


 

Note: Foreign Government Delegations to International Conferences: Funds in this 
agreement may not be used to finance the travel, per diem, hotel expenses, meals, conference 
fees or other conference costs for any member of a foreign government’s delegation to an 
international conference sponsored by a public international organization. 

 

• Indirect Costs: Indirect costs are costs which cannot be directly identified with a single 
contract or grant. The indirect costs are applied equitably across all of the business activities 
of the organization, according to the benefits each gains from them. Some examples of 
indirect costs are office space rental, utilities, and clerical and managerial staff salaries. To 
the extent that indirect costs are reasonable, allowable and allocable they are a legitimate cost 
of doing business payable under a U.S. Government contract or grant. Local Institutions 
usually do not have a Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) letter with the U.S. 
Government. Local institutions submitting applications should treat all indirect costs as 
direct costs unless the Applicant can support the proposed indirect cost rate with a letter from 
a cognizant U.S. Government audit agency or with sufficient information for USAID to 
determine the reasonableness of the rates. (For example, a breakdown of labor bases and 
overhead pools, the method of determining the rate, etc.). In order to better understand 
indirect costs, please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. 


 

The Applicant must submit a Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement NICRA if the 
organization has such an agreement with an agency or department of the U.S. 
Government. If no NICRA the Applicant should submit the following: 

 

o Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public Accountant 
(CPA) documenting the review of the financial statements was performed in accordance 
with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; that management is 
responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in 
accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework and for designing, 
implementing and maintaining internal control relevant to the preparation. The account 
must also state the he or she is not aware of any material modifications that should be 
made to the financial statements; or 


 

o Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issues a report documenting the audit 
was conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the 
financial statements are the responsibility of management, provides an opinion that the 
financial statements present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the 



company and the results of operations are in conformity with the applicable financial 
reporting framework (or issues a qualified opinion if the financial statements are not in 
conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework). 


 

4. Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for 
prior approval by the Agency. If the Applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost 
elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the Applicant 
must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost 
elements require prior written approval. 

 

5. Dun and Bradstreet and SAM.gov Registration 














See Attachment C: Instructions for Registration in DUNS and sam.gov 

6. Funding Restrictions 














 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

7. Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the Recipient 














 

The Applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application. 

 

a. The Applicant shall complete the required certifications and sign and date in the signature space 
provided. http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
b. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
c. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and 
Assistance (M/OAA). 
















 

8. History of Performance 














 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its costreimbursement 
contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, 
not to exceed three years as follows: 

 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 



● Award Number; 
● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three years; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work 
at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact 
information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 


 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain from any sources relevant information 
concerning an Applicant’s history of performance and may consider such information in its review 
of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award 
survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

D.8 UNIQUE ENTITY IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT 


 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding 
agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

i. Be registered in the System for Award Management (SAM) before submitting its 
application. SAM is streamlining processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data 
multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make the process of doing business with the 
government more efficient (www.sam.gov); 
ii. Provide a valid DUNS number in its application for the applicant and all proposed subrecipients 
and subcontractors; 
iii. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are encouraged 
to register early to be eligible to apply for this NOFO. If an Applicant has not fully complied with 
the requirements by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the 
applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an 
award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://www.dnb.com/get-a-duns-number.html 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 


Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

Applicants must set forth full, accurate, and complete information as required by this NOFO. The 
penalty for making false statements to the U.S. Government is prescribed in 18 U.S.C. 1001. 

 

D.9 PRE-AWARD COSTS 


 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.458 - Pre-award costs, Pre-award costs are those incurred prior to 
the effective date of the Federal award directly pursuant to the negotiation and in anticipation of the 
Federal award where such costs are necessary for efficient and timely performance of the scope of 
work. Such costs are allowable only to the extent that they would have been allowable if incurred 
after the date of the Federal award and only with the written approval of the Federal awarding 
agency. Pre-Award costs may be authorized at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. 

 

D.10 BRANDING STRATEGY AND MARKING PLAN (BS/MP) 


 

The Applicant is required to comply (and ensure compliance by partners) with USAID’s branding 
and marking requirements set forth in 2 CFR 700.16. These regulations and provisions include the 
requirement for the apparently successful Applicant to submit a BS/MP for pre-award review, 
negotiation, and approval by the Agreement Officer. Under these regulations and provisions, the 
BS/MP does not need to be submitted until the Applicant is notified by the Agreement Officer that 
it is the apparently successful Applicant, and is requested to submit the BS/MP by a time specified 
by the Agreement Officer. Thus, the initial cost/business application is not required to include a 
BS/MP. Nevertheless, Applicants are encouraged, but are not required, to submit their BS/MP with 
their initial cost/business applications. Applicants who choose not to include their BS/MP with their 
initial cost/business application will not be penalized during the evaluation process, but should be 
aware that, if the Applicant is the apparently successful Applicant, the Applicant will be required to 
submit an acceptable BS/MP as a prerequisite for any resulting award. This would delay any such 
award, pending receipt, review, and, if necessary, negotiation of the Applicant’s BS/MP. Moreover, 
because USAID’s branding and marking requirements have cost implications, such costs must be 
included in the detailed budget even if the Applicant does not submit its BS/MP with the initial 
cost/business application. 

 

Failure to submit or negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time specified by the Agreement 
Officer may make the Apparently Successful Applicant ineligible for award. The proposed 
Branding Strategy and Marking Plan (BS/MP) will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement 
Officer shall review for adequacy the proposed BS/MP, and will negotiate, approve, and include the 
BS/MP in the award. 

 

The Pre-award Terms entitled “Branding Strategy - Assistance” and “Marking Plan - Assistance” 
are found in https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mba.pdf. 

 

D.11 CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) 


 


a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits the applications. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 
ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 


 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to nonpublic 
information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

 

D.12 PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 


 

Upon consideration of award or during the discussions leading to an award, the selected Applicant 
may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the Agreement Officer 
to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. 

 

IMPORTANT NOTE 

 

Applicants should not submit the information below with their Applications. The information in this 
section is provided so that Applicants may become familiar with additional documentation that may 
be requested by the AO before award in order to make the responsibility determination: 

 

These documents may include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Audited financial statements for the past three (3) years that have been audited by a certified 
public accountant or other auditor satisfactory to USAID; 

 

2. Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable; 

 

3. Copies of organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting manual and 
personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, leave, differentials, 
etc., and indicate whether such policies and procedures have been reviewed and approved by 


any agency of the Federal Government. If so, provide the name, address, and phone number of 
the cognizant reviewing official; 

 

4. Other documentation, as required by the Agreement Officer, to substantiate that the Applicant: 

 

● Has adequate financial resources or the ability to obtain such resources as required during 
the performance of the Cooperative Agreement; 
● Has the ability to comply with the award’s terms and conditions, taking into account all 
existing and currently prospective commitments of the Applicant, nongovernmental and 
governmental; 
● Has a satisfactory record of performance. Past relevant unsatisfactory performance is 
ordinarily sufficient to justify a finding of non-responsibility, unless there is clear evidence 
of subsequent satisfactory performance; 
● Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; 
● Is otherwise qualified and eligible to receive a Cooperative Agreement/Grant under 
applicable laws and regulations (e.g., Equal Employment Opportunity Laws). 


 

An award may be made only by the Agreement Officer after making a positive responsibility 
determination that the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management 
competence in planning and carrying out assistance programs, specifically the proposed Activity; 
and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets 
provided by USAID. 

 

For organizations that are new to working with USAID or for organizations with outstanding audit 
findings, or otherwise at USAID’s discretion, USAID may perform a pre-award survey to assess the 
Applicant’s management and financial capabilities. If notified by USAID that a pre-award survey is 
necessary, Applicants must prepare, in advance, the required information and documents. See ADS 
303.3.9.1 at https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf for more 
information on pre-award surveys. Please note that a pre-award survey does not commit USAID to 
make any award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 CRITERIA 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed herein are tailored to the requirements of this NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

As outlined in Section C.2, there is a minimum required cost share for this activity. Applications 
that do not meet the minimum cost share requirement may not eligible for award consideration. 
While it is a minimum requirement for eligibility, cost share will not be considered in the merit 
review criteria. 

 

E.2 TECHNICAL EVALUATION FACTORS 


 

Technical applications will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using the criteria 
shown in this Section. The criteria below are presented by major categories and in descending order 
of importance so that the Applicants know which areas require emphasis in the preparation of the 
applications. 

 

E.2.1 Activity Description (See Section D.6) 










 

The extent to which the proposed activity description convincingly demonstrates the means by 
which to sustainably accomplish the Activity Purpose and Strategic Approaches in 
consideration of the Guiding Principles. 

 

E.2.2 Institutional Experience (See Section D.6) 










 

The extent to which the Prime Applicant convincingly demonstrates relevant experience 
enhancing the likelihood of successful activity implementation. 

 

E.2.3 Key Personnel and Staffing Plan (See Section D.6) 










 

The extent to which the staffing plan, including the proposed key person, convincingly 
demonstrates the Applicant’s ability to successfully implement the activity and leverage local 
Vietnamese expertise. 

 

E.3 COST/BUSINESS APPLICATION EVALUATION 


 

This review will determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the cost principles 
found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

USAID will also consider (1) the extent of the Applicant’s understanding of the financial aspects of 
the program and the Applicant’s ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; (2) 


whether the Applicant’s plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable economy and 
efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 200.306, 
2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision “Cost Sharing (Matching)” for U.S. entities, or the 
Standard Provision “Cost Share” for non-U.S. entities. The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 
CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-award survey is required to inform the risk 
assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient has the necessary organizational, 
experience, accounting and operational controls, financial resources, and technical skills – or ability 
to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to 
execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

E.4 DETERMINATION OF AWARD 


 

The submitted technical information will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using 
the criteria shown above. The cost/business application will be reviewed by the Agreement 
Officer/Agreement Specialist. As a result of this process, USAID intends to select the apparently 
successful recipient based upon the initial application submission. Once the selection is made, the 
Government may address individually any concerns to the selected recipient for resolution. 
However, the Government reserves the right to negotiate with one or more applicant prior to 
selection of the successful recipient if in the best interest of the Government. 

 

If USAID and the apparently successful Applicant cannot come to a mutual understanding during 
the course of discussion, or if the apparently successful Applicant is unable to provide satisfactory 
Technical and Cost Applications, or did not meet deadlines for submissions, or presents an 
unacceptable risk as a result of the risk assessment, then the Agreement Officer may designate the 
next highest-evaluated Applicant as the apparently successful Applicant. This decision is at the sole 
discretion of the Agreement Officer. The Agreement Officer’s decision regarding funding of an 
award is final and not subject to review. Any information that may impact the Agreement Officer’s 
decision shall be directed to the Agreement Officer. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1 FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential Applicant is hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

F.2 ADMINISTRATION 


 

Awards will be made under relevant federal regulations and agency policy. For U.S nongovernmental 
organizations, awards must be administered according to 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, 
and USAID Standard Provisions will apply (https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa). For 
non U.S. non- governmental organizations, USAID provisions for non U.S. non-government 
organizations will apply (https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

F.3 PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL REPORTING 


 

Financial reporting requirements will depend on the method of payment. Recipients will comply 
with the financial reporting requirements set forth in the USAID standard provisions. If advance 
payments are provided, reporting periods are calendar quarters or parts thereof. Quarterly financial 
reports are due not later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. If payment is on a 
reimbursement basis, financial reports may be submitted monthly, but not less frequently than 30 
days after the end of each calendar quarter. Regardless of whether payments are on an advance or 
reimbursement basis, the final financial report is due not later than 90 days after the estimated 
completion date of the award. The Recipient shall also comply with the USAID standard provision 
entitled “Reporting Host Government Taxes.” 

 

F.4 LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 


Section 660 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (FAA) prohibits assistance to police and prisons, 
with certain exceptions. However, Section 119(b) of the FAA provides specific notwithstanding 
authority to fund assistance to law enforcement entities for the purposes of “protecting and 
maintaining wildlife habitats and in developing sound wildlife management and plant conservation 
programs.” It also states that “special efforts should be made… to enact and enforce anti-poaching 
measures.” Relying on this notwithstanding authority, the activities contemplated under this award 
may include assistance to law enforcement entities. By way of policy, however, the Agency has 
taken the position that it will not rely on FAA Sec. 119(b) authority to support actual law 
enforcement operations. By way of definition, “law enforcement” is interpreted by the Agency as 
any entity that has authority to carry out some or all of the functions normally exercised by a law 
enforcement force, including the authority to carry weapons, make arrests, conduct searches, 
interrogate, supervise confinement or initiate prosecutions; and “law enforcement operations” 


includes activities such as participation in field investigations, covert operations, raids and arrests 
that have a potential risk to the physical safety of USAID partners and USG staff. The USAID 
Legal Officer, through the AOR, must be consulted and authorize any activities that might be 
considered “law enforcement operations.” 

An additional legal requirement related to work with law enforcement is that assistance to the 
security forces of any country is prohibited when there is credible information that such forces have 
committed gross human rights violations (FAA Sec. 620M). Therefore, beneficiaries of the 
activities who are considered “security forces” must be successfully vetted per “Leahy Vetting” 
guidelines prior to their receiving assistance. 

 

F.5 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 


 

Program Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

 

All written documentation must be submitted in professional-level English. The reports listed below 
are the initial reports required by the recipient. Based on the evolving nature of the agreement, 
USAID may provide modified reporting requirements. 

 

Note: USAID’s fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30. Four fiscal quarterly 

periods begin on October 1, January 1, April 1, and July 1. 

 

Reports and Deliverables 

Due Dates 

Delivery 

1. Activity Start-up Plan 

60 calendar days after award. 

Electronically 

AOR 

2. Start-up workshop 

90 calendar days after award 

Workshop with USAID and 
relevant partners 

3. Annual Work Plan 

First work plan – 160 calendar days 
after award 

 

Subsequent annual work plans – 30 
days before the end of each USG 
fiscal year 

Electronically 

AOR 

4. Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning 
(MEL) Plan 

160 calendar days after award 

Electronically 

AOR 

5. Quarterly Progress 
Reports 

By March 31st, June 30th, 
September 30th and December 31st 
of each year 

Electronically 

AOR 

Financial Analyst Team 

6. Annual Pause and Reflect 
Sessions 

TBD 

Workshop with USAID and 
relevant partners 




7. Annual Performance 
Report 

September 30th of each year 

Electronically 

AOR 

8. Final Report 

30 calendar days prior to the end of 
the Agreement 

Electronically 

AOR 

9. Financial Reports 

Quarterly Financial Report: 
30 calendar days after the end 
of each USG fiscal quarter 

Final Financial Report: 90 days 
following the expiration of 
the award. 

Electronically 

AOR 

Financial Analyst Team 



 

1. Activity Start-up Plan - Within 60 days post-award the Recipient will submit an activity startup 
plan to identify plans for the start-up workshop, the work plan and the MEL plan. The 
activity start-up plan should also identify any initial assessments planned by the Recipient. 
More details on the format of the start-up plan will be provided after award. 


 

2. Start-up Workshop - Within 90 days post-award the Recipient will hold a workshop that 
includes USAID staff and relevant partners to guide development of the first year work plan, 
activity theory of change and MEL plan. The workshop will also serve to define format and 
requirements for deliverables and reporting. The objective of the workshop is to provide a 
dedicated forum for the activity consortium, USAID staff and other relevant partners to 
collaborate to refine the submitted activity description, theory of change and MEL Plan. Note, 
at the discretion of the AOR, this workshop may include or be done collectively with other 
mission implementing partners working on forest and biodiversity conservation. 


 

3. Annual Work Plan - The annual work plan details how the Recipient will use the work plan 
year effectively to achieve the activity purpose and strategic approaches. The work plan serves 
as a guide to program implementation and, once approved, represents an agreement as to the 
objectives and timing of specific tasks and interventions. The work plan is intended to be an 
annual roadmap for USAID and the Recipient. It should be closely aligned to the theory of 
change agreed upon during the start-up workshop, and clearly explain how the actions and 
outputs will lead to the expected outcomes identified in the theory of change. More details on 
the format of the work plan will be provided after award. 


 

(Note: first year work plan should go from activity start date through the end of the next fiscal 
year so may be longer or shorter than 12 months depending on the date of the award.) 

 

4. Activity Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (MEL) - The Recipient is required to have an 
Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL) capable of tracking and 
documenting progress against the Activity strategic approaches and results. The MEL plan 
should be framed by, and closely aligned with, the agreed-upon activity theory of change. The 
MEL reflects the award progress over the life of the Activity and is a critical tool for planning, 
managing, documenting, evaluating performance and learning. Findings from the MEL should 
be reviewed and validated in annual pause-and reflect-sessions with USAID staff, and revised 



when appropriate in consultation with the AOR. More details on the format of the MEL plan 
will be provided after award. 


 

5. Quarterly Performance Reports - The Recipient will submit quarterly performance reports to 
reflect progress, the activities of the preceding three months and lessons learned. The report 
must describe the tasks completed in the last three months relative to what was anticipated in 
the approved work plan, and will assess the overall activity impact to date relative to the 
performance indicator targets and results defined in the activity theory of change. More details 
on the format of the quarterly performance reports will be provided after award. 


 

6. Annual Pause-and-Reflect Sessions (APR) - Annual pause and reflect (APR) sessions should 
precede and inform the development of the annual work plan and annual performance report. 
These will form the basis for a management review conducted by USAID and program staff to 
assess: program directions, priorities, achievements, and prior year implementation results; 
management and implementation impediments; and recommendations for adaptive 
management actions. The format, participation and final output of the APR will be defined 
through consultation with the AOR and can entail a series of internal meetings, a multi-day 
workshop, or a brief report to summarize learning and major conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the actions and strategic approaches to achieve the activity purpose. The APR 
may be used to suggest refinements or updates to the activity theory of change, MEL plan, and 
subsequent annual work plans. Note, at the discretion of the AOR, APRs may include or be 
done collectively with other mission implementing partners working on forest and biodiversity 
conservation. 


 

7. Annual Performance Report - Annual performance reports will summarize actions, progress 
and results during the year in relation to the approved work plan and the activity theory of 
change it supports. The report should include lessons learned, proposed adaptive management 
shifts, and proposed updates to the theory of change. The annual performance report will be 
used by USAID to assess the status of activity implementation. Each annual performance 
report will include an assessment as to whether the activity strategic approaches and actions are 
leading to the activity purpose. The annual performance report will cover all of the items 
included in the quarterly performance report, with a focus on the Activity results over the 
entire year. More details on the format of the annual performance report will be provided after 
award. 


 

8. Final Report - The Final Report must discuss all strategic approaches and results from the 
start of the award through its completion. More details on the format of the final report will be 
provided after award. 


 

9. Financial Reports: Financial Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard 
Provisions. 


 

Quarterly Financial Report: Quarterly Financial Reports shall be due within 30 days 
following the end of each quarter corresponding to USAID’s fiscal year from October 1 
through September 30. 

 


Final Financial Report 

 

The Final Financial Report shall be due within 90 days following the expiration of the award. 
Financial Reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700. USAID requires recipients to use 
the Standard Form 425 or Standard Form 425a, Federal Financial Report, or such other forms 
authorized for obtaining financial information as may be approved by OMB. 

 

Financial reports shall be submitted as follows: Financial Analyst, Office of Financial 
Management (email: hanoiusaidfa@usaid.gov) and the AOR. 

 

F.6 SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION 


 

USAID recipients must submit one electronic copy of development experience documentation to 
the Development Experience Clearinghouse. Development experience documentation may be 
submitted online: http://dec.usaid.gov. Or by mail (for pouch delivery): 

 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

Phone: (202) 712-0579 

Email: docsubmit@usaid.gov 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR for the award. 

 

F.7 PROGRAM INCOME 


 

Program Income earned under the resultant award will be added to the Total Estimated 

Amount (exclusive of cost share) in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307(e)(2). 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 

 


 REFERENCES 

 

APPLICABLE REGULATIONS & REFERENCES 

 

1. Standard Provisions For U.S., Nongovernmental Recipients 


http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 

 

2. Mandatory Standard Provisions For Non U.S Non-Governmental Recipients 


http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab 

 

3. 2 CFR 700 


https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
SID=2d1b5d9221b2dd0c0fe7ad5a5a9b98fd&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 

 

4. 2 CFR 200 


http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 

 

5. ADS Series 300 Acquisition and Assistance 


http://www.usaid.gov/pubs/ads/ 

 

6. SF-424 Downloads 


http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

 

7. Prohibition on Federal Contracting with and Providing Federal Assistance to Entities That 
Require Certain Internal Confidentiality Agreements 


http://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/aapds-cibs/aapd-15-01 

 

8. USAID Biodiversity Policy 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/USAID%20Biodiversity%20Policy% 
20-%20June%202015.pdf 


 

9. How-To-Guides for USAID Biodiversity Programming 
https://rmportal.net/biodiversityconservation-gateway/projects/closed-globalprojects/
measuring-impact/how-to-guides-for-usaid-biodiversity-programming 


 

10. The Nature of Conservation Enterprises 


https://rmportal.net/biodiversityconservation-gateway/projects/closed-globalprojects/
measuring-impact/the-nature-resources 

 

11. Vietnam Tropical Forest and Biodiversity Analysis 


https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyM 
i00YjRmLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTU3OTky 

 

12. Prioritizing Investments in Land-based Climate Mitigation in Vietnam 



https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx?ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjRm 
LTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTU2Mjk5&inr=VHJ1ZQ%3d%3d&dc=YWRk&rrtc 
=VHJ1ZQ%3d%3d&bckToL= 

 

13. FY 2019 Foreign Assistance Master Indicator List 


https://www.state.gov/foreign-assistance-resource-library/#managing 

 

14. Nature Wealth and Power 


https://rmportal.net/library/content/nwp-2.0 

https://rmportal.net/library/content/nature-wealth-and-power-emerging-best-practice-forrevitalizing-
rural-africa/view 

 

15. Biodiversity and development handbook 


https://rmportal.net/biodiversityconservation-gateway/gateway-resources/biodiversity-anddevelopment-
handbook-1 

 

16. USAID Green Annamites Activity Reports 


Year 1 – Annual Report: https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00TNRF.pdf 

Year 2 – Annual Report: https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00TNRG.pdf 

Year 3 – Annual Report: https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00WDVS.pdf 

Year 4 – Q1 Report: 
https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyM 
i00YjRmLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTU4MzQ2 

 

17. USAID Vietnam Forests and Deltas Reports 


https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/search/SearchResults.aspx?q=ZG9jdW1lbnRzLmNvbnRyYWN0X2d 
yYW50X251bWJlcjooIkFJRC00ODYtQS0xMi0wMDAwOSIp&qcf=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2Yy 
Mi00YjRmLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy 

 

 

[END OF ATTACHMENT A] 

 


 FULL APPLICATION BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

The budget is the financial expression of the Activity. The following template represents an 
example of what USAID anticipates receiving in an Activity budget with Application submission. 

 

NOFO No. 72044020RFA00004 

USAID Biodiversity Conservation 

 

 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year … 

Total 5 years 

Cost Element 

Unit 

Amt 
(US$) 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

Unit 

Amt 
(US$) 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

… 

… 

… 

… 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

Total Direct Labor 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Headquarter 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Salary/Wages 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Country Office(s) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Salary/Wages 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Consultants 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Travel, Transportation 
and Per Diem 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Training/Conference 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawardee A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawardee B 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Estimated Cost 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 


 INSTRUCTIONS FOR REGISTRATION IN DUNS AND SAM.GOV 

 

 

D-U-N-S Numbers 

 

The Data Universal Number System (DUNS) number is a unique nine-character number that 

identifies your organization. It is a tool of the federal government to track how federal money is 

distributed. If your organization does not know its DUNS number or needs to register for one, 

visit Dun & Bradstreet website: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform/displayHomePage.do. 

 

How long should it take? 

 

If requested over the phone, DUNS is provided immediately. Web form requests take 1 to 2 

business days. List of Information you will need to obtain a DUNS number (if your organization 

does not already have one): 

● Name of organization 

● Organization address 

● Name of the CEO/organization owner 

● Legal structure of the organization (corporation, partnership, proprietorship) 

● Year the organization started 

● Primary type of business 

● Total number of employees (full and part time) 

If your organization does not have a DUNS number, use the Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) online 

registration to receive one free of charge. 

 

How do I get my D-U-N-S Number? 

Visit D-U-N-S Request Service to obtain more detailed instructions on applying for your DUNS 

Number. Also, visit the System for Award Management (SAM). 

 

SAM 

 

The System for Award Management (SAM) is combining federal procurement systems and the 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance into one new system 

 

Register/Update Entity 

You can register your Entity (business, individual, or government agency) to do business with 

the Federal Government. If you are interested in registering or updating your Entity, you must first 
create a user account. Visit https://www.sam.gov for registration. 


 INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION 

 

[The document is inserted in the following page] 


