 

 

Issue Date: April 05, 2022 

Deadline for Question Clarifications: April 11, 2022 

Closing Date: May 05, 2022 (09:00 am, Hanoi Time) 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number: 72044022RFA00002 

 

Activity Title: Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution 

 

 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Vietnam (USAID/Vietnam) is 
seeking applications for a Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the Vietnam 
Action Against Plastic Pollution Activity. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. The authority for 
the NOFO is found in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the responsible applicant whose application best meets the 
requirements of this NOFO and the Merit Review Criteria contained herein. While one award is 
anticipated as a result of this Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), USAID reserves the right to 
fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

 

Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received funding from USAID may be 
subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, ensure adequacy of financial controls, 
and establish an indirect cost rate. 

 

For the purposes of this NOFO the term “Grant” is synonymous with “Cooperative Agreement”; 
“Grantee” is synonymous with “Recipient”; and “Grant Officer” is synonymous with “Agreement 
Officer”. Eligible organizations interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
funding opportunity thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and evaluation process. The successful applicant will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the website to 
ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity. It is the 
responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its 
entirety and USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion 
processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please 
contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 


USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.8. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for questions 
is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to all potential 
applicants through an amendment to this notice posted on www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part 
of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation 
or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of 
the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 /s/ 

 

Bryan Moody 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition & Assistance 

USAID/Vietnam 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

Contents 
TABLE OF CONTENTS........................................................................................................... 3 
SECTION A: FUNDING OPPORTUNITY DESCRIPTION ................................................... 5 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ............................................................ 22 
B.1 ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 22 
B.2 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 22 
B.3 SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 22 
B.4 AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 22 
B.5 NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 22 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION...................................................................... 24 
C.1 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 24 
C.2 COST SHARING OR MATCHING 24 
C.3 ELIGIBILITY OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR USAID FINANCING 24 
C.4 ELIGIBILITY OF ACTIVITIES UNDER USAID’S ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 25 
C.5 LIMITATIONS ON SUBMISSIONS 26 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION .................................. 27 
D.1. AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT 27 
D.2. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 27 
D.3. SUBMISSION DATE AND TIME 27 
D.4. APPLICANTS RESPONSIVENESS 28 
D.5. APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 28 
D.6. TECHNICAL APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS 29 
D.7. COST APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS 35 
D.8. SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT 41 
D.9. PRE-AWARD COSTS 42 
D.10. BRANDING STRATEGY AND MARKING PLAN (BS/MP) 42 
D.11. CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) 46 
D.12. PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 47 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ................................................... 49 
E.1 CRITERIA 49 
E.2 TECHNICAL EVALUATION FACTORS 49 
E.3 COST/BUSINESS APPLICATION EVALUATION 50 
E.4 DETERMINATION OF AWARD 51 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ......................... 52 
F.1 FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 52 
F.2 ADMINISTRATION 52 
F.3 PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL REPORTING 52 
F.4 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 52 
F.5 SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION 56 
F.6 PROGRAM INCOME 57 
ATTACHMENT A: BUDGET TEMPLATE .......................................................................... 58 
ATTACHMENT B: STANDARD PROVISIONS ................................................................... 59 
ATTACHMENT C: INNITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE)..................... 62 



SECTION A: FUNDING OPPORTUNITY DESCRIPTION 

 

A.1 Overview 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

A.2 Background 

Ocean plastic pollution has drawn significant attention from the international community and 
national governments due to the serious impacts it causes on the environment, marine life, local 
economies, and human health, and its contributions to climate change. Each year, 11 million metric 
tons of plastic waste enter our oceans, equivalent to more than one garbage truck every minute. This 
rate is expected to double by the end of this decade and triple by 2040. Once plastic is in the ocean, 
it is very difficult and expensive to remove, therefore preventing plastic from getting into the 
natural environment is the most efficient way to address this issue. The majority of marine debris, 
including ocean plastic, originates on land. Poorly managed solid waste and especially plastic waste 
discarded in the environment is clogging drains and small rivers causing flooding, transmitting 
vector-borne diseases, and, when burned, increasing respiratory diseases and affecting air quality. 
This mismanaged plastic waste harms animals, on the land and in the ocean, when they ingest or get 
tangled in it; alters river flows; and affects coral health, fisheries, and mangroves. This costs 
billions of dollars to fisheries, tourism, and other industries, threatening economies and livelihoods 
across the globe. 

Vietnam Context 

Vietnam is one of the top plastic polluters of the world’s ocean, with estimated leakage of 
between 280,000 and 730,000 metric tons of plastic annually1. Surveys conducted by the Center for 
Supporting Green Development (GreenHub) in 38 coastal and river sites in 10 provinces and cities 
in Vietnam in 2020-2021 show that plastic waste is the most abundant type of solid waste collected 
(94% in number and 71% by weight). This urgency is even more challenging due to the surge of 
Personal Protective Equipment waste such as masks, gloves, clothes, and healthcare waste, together 
with home and office delivery packaging during the COVID-19 lockdowns, resulting in more 
plastics packaging discarded2. 

1 https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XWPQ.pdf 

2 Ebner, N. and Iacovidou, E. (2021). The challenges of Covid-19 pandemic on improving plastic waste recycling rates. Sustainable Production and Consumption 28, 726– 
735. 

3 IUCN-EA-QUANTIS (2020). National Guidance for plastic pollution hotspotting and shaping action, Country report Vietnam. 

High plastic waste leakage also results from unsustainable collection, recycling, and treatment 
systems. Recycling is rarely part of the formal waste management system, which instead relies 
heavily on market forces to incentivize informal waste collectors (IWCs) for collection and 
aggregation. The latest data (2018) show only 6% of total domestically-generated plastic waste in 
Vietnam was recycled, mainly through the informal sector3. The cheap labor of this strong informal 


NOFO No. 72044022RFA00002 Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution 

network offers a competitive advantage, but the unregulated collection junk shop/ craft village 
system is unsustainable due to health hazards for workers and environmental pollution4. Recycling 
of waste and scraps for reuse has existed in Vietnam for only a few decades. These activities have 
not been well organized and have occurred on a small scale. It is difficult to estimate the rate of 
recycling in Vietnam due to a lack of data, but sources generally agree recycling rates are low estimated 
at around 10 percent. Collected waste is disposed of in open dumping sites, and in 
sanitary and unsanitary landfills. There is little waste separation at source and consequently the near 
absence of plastic waste recycling is a countrywide problem. The national government heavily 
subsidizes the publicly owned companies handling solid waste collection and landfill operations in 
Vietnamese cities. 

Local governments are struggling with the collection, transport, treatment, and disposal of 
growing solid waste streams. Although Vietnam’s government has committed to move towards 
collecting, transporting, and treating 100% of non-household waste by 2025 and 85% of waste 
discharged by households by 2025 in urban areas through its revised National Strategy on Solid 
Waste Management, it is acknowledged that Vietnam still faces challenges related to the collection, 
transport, treatment, and disposal of waste generated in urban areas5. Collection and transportation 
of domestic waste, especially in urban areas, is commonly accomplished through loosely 
coordinated cooperation by the private companies and the informal waste collector community. A 
more recent study analyzing the fate of waste in Vietnam estimates that in 2018 plastic waste 
leakage in Vietnamese waterways was 182,000 metric tons per year, or 5% of total plastic waste 
generated in Vietnam6. The same study estimates that along with an expected increase to 103 
million inhabitants in 2030 (an 8% increase from 2018) and an increase of the average municipal 
waste generation rate from 0.76 to 1.01 kilogram per capita per day from 2018 to 2030, the 
percentage of plastic in the waste stream is expected to increase to 15% by 2030. The rapid rise of 
plastic imports, production, and use, and mismanaged waste in Vietnam has led to a country-wide 
crisis of plastic pollution with negative consequences to the country's economic development, 
tourism industry, cultural heritage, and human and environmental health. 

The informal sector plays a sizable role in the SWM system by collecting virtually all the waste 
in urban low-income neighborhoods and rural areas across Vietnam7. Informal waste collectors are 
collecting and processing plastic waste from packaging while greatly assisting the limited existing 
formal waste collection services across Vietnam’s cities. The informal waste collectors often come 
from vulnerable communities, occupying the lowest rung of the socioeconomic ladder, and a large 
number of them are women, who face gender barriers that limit their earning power and constrain 
their access to economic opportunities. Women in the informal waste sector are usually employed 
in low-paid and less skilled jobs along the plastic value chain, they lack access to business capital 
and equipment, and are more often exposed to toxic and hazardous conditions. In addition, informal 
sector recyclers also dominate the sectors. 

4 Salhofer, S. et al. (2021). Plastic Recycling Practices in Vietnam and Related Hazards for Health and the Environment. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 18, 4203. 

5 Vietnam Ministry of Planning and Investment (2017). National Strategy for Integrated Solid Waste Management to 2025, Vision to 2050. Accessed at: 

http://asemconnectvietnam.gov.vn/default.aspx?ZID1=14&ID8=14639&ID1=2. 

6 National Plastic Action Partnership: Baseline Results for Vietnam 

7 https://pacecircular.org/sites/default/files/2021-02/FINAL-Informal-Sector-Report_compressed.pdf 


The Government of Vietnam (GVN) has been proactive in taking steps to address these 
challenges. The Law on Environmental Protection, approved in 2005 and revised in 2014, was the 
first law first addressing the 3Rs (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle) and solid waste management (SWM)8. 
In December 2017, Vietnam officially joined the list of 127 countries adopting a resolution of the 
UN Environment Assembly on addressing plastic waste and marine debris. The government has 
also developed a comprehensive set of other legal documents fostering the momentum in Vietnam 
to push improvements for 3R/SWM systems and the circular economy such as: 

8 https://www.giz.de/de/downloads/giz2018_Vietnam-Country-Profile_web.pdf 

9 https://luatvietnam.vn/tai-nguyen/nghi-dinh-08-2022-nd-cp-215632-d1.html 

● The national strategy on integrated management of solid wastes up to 2025, with a vision 
toward 2050, was adjusted by the Prime Minister in May 2018 (Decision No. 491/QD-TTg). 
This strategy set a target of collecting, transporting, and disposing of 100% of the total 
volume of hazardous solid wastes generated from production, business and service 
activities, health establishments, and craft villages, and 85% of hazardous solid wastes 
generated by households and individuals according to the environmental protection 
requirements by 2025. 
● In December 2019, the Prime Minister issued the National Action Plan on Marine Plastic 
Waste Management by 2030 that aims to reduce 75 percent of plastic debris in the ocean in 
the next 10 years. In 2020, an implementation plan to support these actions was launched. 
● In July 2021, the Prime Minister issued Decision No. 1316/QD-TTg approving the scheme 
for strengthening management of plastic wastes in Vietnam. According to this Decision, 
specific objectives of the scheme include: 100% of plastic bags and packaging used at 
shopping centers and supermarkets for domestic purposes will be environmentally friendly, 
as a replacement for non-biodegradable plastic bags; 85% of generated plastic wastes will be 
collected, reused, recycled, and disposed of; 50% of marine plastic wastes will be reduced; 
and 100% of tourist attractions, tourist accommodation establishments, and hotels will not 
use non-biodegradable plastic bags and single-use plastic products. The Prime Minister 
specifies tasks and solutions to implement the scheme, including investigating, surveying, 
and assessing the situation of generation, collection, and treatment of plastic wastes; 
implementing training, communication, and international cooperation on plastic waste 
management; and conducting research on, applying technologies, and deploying models and 
activities related to the management of plastic wastes and the production of environmentally 
friendly products. 
● The Law on Environmental Protection, revised in 2020, for the first time introduced the 
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) concept which extends the responsibilities of 
producers and importers in regard to the recycling and treatment of discarded products and 
packaging which contain non-biodegradable microplastics. Recently released decree 
(08/2022/ND-CP)9 on the implementation of the Law on Environmental Protection by the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment (MONRE) includes chapters guiding 
the EPR implementation, restricting imports and production and use of single-use plastics 
(SUPs). 



While the GVN has set ambitious targets and includes provisions for creating a circular economy 
on plastic packaging sectors, there is no clear roadmap guiding implementation of these policies. 
The GVN has requested support from the World Bank in analyzing policy options for phasing out 
priority SUPs and charting a roadmap for implementation of policy options. A roadmap outlining 
the steps in implementation of the EPR mechanism focused on plastic packaging or other plastic 
products does not currently exist. 

USAID approach and ocean plastic work in Vietnam 

USAID is promoting a framework focused on locally-led approaches to address land-based 
sources of ocean plastic pollution. Per the 2020 Save our Seas 2.0 Act, USAID prioritizes efforts to 
reduce plastic waste by improving the capacity of and encouraging private sector investment in solid 
waste management systems and strengthening policies and incentives to shape behaviors for the 3Rs. 
USAID’s local systems approach comprises five key building blocks: (1) enabling policy and 
institutional environments for a circular economy10 and the “3Rs” (reduce, reuse, recycle); (2) 
increased infrastructure investment and improved solid waste services; (3) market development for 
locally-appropriate innovations and technologies; (4) behavior change for recycling and reduced 
demand for single-use plastics; and (5) integration and empowerment of all members of the solid 
waste management (SWM) value chain in an inclusive, equitable system11. 

10 The SOS 2.0 defines a circular economy for purposes of that Act as an economy that “uses a systems-focused approach and involves industrial processes and economic 
activities that— (A) are restorative or regenerative by design; (B) enable resources used in such processes and activities to maintain their highest values for as long as 
possible; and (C) aim for the elimination of waste through the superior design of materials, products, and systems (including business models).” 

11 https://urban-links.org/ 

12 Detail about the MWRP grants in Vietnam can be found at https://urban-links.org/project/municipal-waste-recycling-program-mwrp/#Vietnam 

13 https://urban-links.org/wp-content/uploads/2020.09.15_Country-Factsheet_VN.pdf 

USAID’s work in preventing ocean plastic pollution by addressing land-based sources has been 
carried out through a mixture of Washington-funded programs - the Municipal Waste Recycling 
Program (MWRP) and USAID’s current global flagship program, Clean Cities, Blue Ocean (CCBO) 
- and the USAID/Vietnam Local Works funded activity Local Solutions for Plastic Pollution. 

Between 2016 and 2021 the MWRP supported eight grant projects in seven cities across Vietnam 
with a $1.5 million USAID investment12. MWRP grantees in Vietnam focused on working with the 
private sector such as fisherfolk, market vendors, tourist services, hotels, and restaurants to increase 
recycling and incorporate sustainable business waste reduction practices; connecting the tourist 
industries to municipal partners to reduce single-use plastic waste; offering new waste management 
technology to aquaculture entrepreneurs; empowering women and informal waste collectors in the 
SWM and recycling value chain; developing community- and household-based models for waste 
collection; and developing effective policies. 

Under CCBO, USAID’s current global flagship program, the work in Vietnam is focused on four 
engagement sites: Phu Quoc, Da Nang, Bien Hoa and Hue City to design and implement holistic 
strategies that address each step in the waste value chain—from production to its end use— 
prioritizing the most inclusive, economically viable, and environmentally sustainable solutions13. 
Since 2020, CCBO has been focused on conducting critical site-level research to understand 
engagement sites’ specific challenges in SWM and enforcement, behavior change, and barriers to 


private sector investment; awarding grants to local partners to begin implementing effective, 
locally-led solutions to achieve program objectives; and providing technical assistance and capacity 
building support using international and local program staff. 

The USAID Vietnam Local Solutions for Plastic Pollution (LSPP) project (2020-2023) aims to 
empower local communities to build collective action from the ground up to reduce plastics 
pollution. The project creates, strengthens, and unites networks, communities, and individuals in 
Hanoi, Da Nang, and Hoi An. Key strategic approaches include catalyzing local ownership to 
network for collective action; strengthening local capacity to foster local ownership, facilitate 
networking, and generate solutions to plastic waste health challenges; and creating public digital 
platforms to mobilize citizens and businesses in collective action for plastic pollution solutions. 

A.3 Development Hypothesis and Approach 

 

Ocean plastics pollution is a global challenge, but the solutions should be local. USAID is 
promoting a framework focused on locally-led and systems approaches to address land-based 
sources of ocean plastic pollution. USAID envisions that proposed activities will touch on the 
USAID local systems approach building blocks (referenced in A.2). 

 

The “Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution” Activity’s development hypothesis being tested is: 
IF multi-sector actions for Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) are fostered, and IF 
subnational single use plastic (SUP) reduction measures are demonstrated, and IF subnational level 
integrated solid waste management (ISWM) models are developed and implemented, THEN ocean 
plastic pollution at sources will be reduced in Vietnam. 

 

The results framework built around the development hypothesis outlines three objectives, supported 
by cross-cutting objectives on transparency, collective action, mitigating climate change by 
reducing emissions from new plastic products through the reduction of SUP and recycling and 
proper disposal of plastic products, and promoting inclusiveness and equitability by including 
vulnerable populations such as informal waste collectors as part of setting the demonstrative 
activities on EPR, and SUP reduction models as well as integrated SWM approaches. The activities 
under fostering multi-stakeholder action for EPR (Obj. 1) should be designed and implemented at 
both national and sub-national scale, while the activities under the SUP reduction measures (Obj. 2) 
and integrated SWM models (Obj. 3) should be focused on the sub-national level. In addition, the 
successful Applicant must ensure that the activities under each of the objectives are interlinked and 
reinforce the outcomes across the three objectives. While the results framework represents 
USAID’s current vision of objectives and intermediate results to achieve the activity goal of 
reducing plastic pollution at source in Vietnam, the Applicant is encouraged to propose additional 
outcomes and innovative solutions that will ensure the fulfillment of the Activity’s objectives and 
goal. The Applicant is also encouraged to include achievable and ambitious results and highlight 
the practical linkages between the Activity’s objectives through proposing activities that can 
contribute to achieving more than one objective. 

 

Figure 1. Results Framework 


Text
Description automatically generated 


USAID assumes that a context-driven approach must be taken to achieve success under these three 
objectives given the high number of actors involved and the complexity of local systems related to 
solid waste management and plastic pollution. In order to be successful, the Activity will need, in 
line with Collaborating, Learning & Adapting (CLA) approaches: 

● Strong political analysis, insight, and understanding 
● Appreciation for and responsiveness to local context 
● To be flexible and managed adaptively 


 

For more on integrating this approach into implementation, see USAID’s resources on contextdriven 
adaptation on USAID Learning Lab. 

 

This Activity will be managed by the Office of Climate Change, Energy and Environment at the 
United States Agency of International Development (USAID) Mission in Hanoi. The activity is 
expected to work with a wide range of stakeholders (e.g., national and local governments, private 
sector, communities, NGOs, Academia) to implement activities at the national and sub-national 
levels, to coordinate with USAID’s and other donors’ existing programs working on this issue, and 
to collaborate and share information, best practices, and lessons learned on a regular basis, which 
will lead to a greater impact and more positive, sustainable change. 

 

A.4 Goals and Objectives 

 

The “Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution” activity aims to reduce ocean plastic pollution at 
its source in Vietnam through strategic approaches such as convening stakeholders’ power, 
promoting the creation and implementation of data-driven policies, enhancing knowledge and 
sharing learning, promoting appropriately scaled technology and solutions, and providing technical 


expertise and building capacity of local governments to manage waste at its source and prevent 
plastic pollution in our oceans. 

 

This Activity is designed to support the Government of Vietnam's commitment to improving solid 
waste management and reducing plastic pollution in the environment and oceans and support 
Development Objective 3 in the USAID/Vietnam Country Development Cooperation Strategy 
(2020-2025), “Environmental security improved”, specifically Intermediate Result 4, “Collective 
action accelerated for reducing environmental pollution.” Collaboration with a wide range of local 
actors such as civil society, the private sector, and national, subnational, and local governments is 
expected to further environmental security and sustainability in Vietnam. The Activity is also 
expected to support cross-cutting outcomes on transparency, collective action, climate change, and 
gender equality and inclusive development and implement activities at national and subnational 
level to achieve its goal and objectives. 

 

Activity Goal: Plastic pollution at source in Vietnam is reduced. 

 

Activity Objective 1: Fostering multi-stakeholder actions for Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR). 

 

This objective will be achieved through three outcomes: 

Outcome 1.1: EPR policy development and implementation support provided 

Outcome 1.2: Wide range of stakeholders convened and EPR demonstrative scheme(s) designed 

Outcome 1.3: EPR demonstrative scheme(s) implemented and learning captured 

 

Illustrative activities: The applicant must creatively propose innovations and technical activities to 
achieve the outcomes under this objective and the success measured. The illustrative activities may 
include but are not limited to the following: 

 

● Facilitate dialogue(s)/workshop(s) for a wide range of stakeholders to build the knowledge 
and mutual understanding around the business case of the EPR framework and/ or socialize 
the Decree 08/2022/ND-CP 
● Implement the EPR decree in specific geographies or a sector 
● Support the ongoing efforts by the National EPR Council and inform the design of the EPR 
scheme and implementation through research, data collection and analysis 
● Enable multi-stakeholder platform on EPR demonstration scheme(s) implementation for 
plastic packaging product(s) 
● Draw lessons from the process and identify opportunities for replication in other sectors 
● Conduct awareness and educational campaign around the EPR demonstration scheme(s)to 
change customer and business behavior 
● Build database portal and develop monitoring and reporting protocols 


 

Illustrative measures of success: The applicant must creatively propose innovations and 
measurable indicators that measure the outcomes and successes. The illustrative indicators may 
include but are not limited to the following: 


● Number of public policies that advance EPR/circular economy and 3R/SWM supported by 
USG assistance or Number of laws, policies, regulations, or standards formally proposed, 
adopted, or implemented as supported by USG assistance 
● Number of events, engagements, or publications demonstrating USAID influence in ocean 
plastics reduction 
● Number of established and functional public-private dialogues / platforms for strengthening 
policies or Number of local mechanisms supported with USG assistance for citizens to 
engage their sub-national government 
● Number of institutions that have adopted and/or implemented new policies, procedures, 
and/or practices as a result of USG intervention. 
● Investments mobilized (USD) from the private sector for waste separation and collection, 
recycling for plastic packing which implemented EPR demonstrative scheme(s). 


 

Outcome 1.1: EPR policy development and implementation support provided 

 

The EPR is an environmental policy approach under which the producers are responsible for the 
waste generated from their products, often including collection, transportation, recycling, and use of 
recyclate in new products. The EPR concept has been introduced in the Vietnam legislative 
framework in the 2005 Law on Environmental Protection but has not been implemented by most 
producers and importers in Vietnam because no mandatory quota has been set. This is changing 
through the 2020 Law on Environment Protection, which came into effect on January 1, 2022, and 
its guidance released on January 10, 2022 (Decree 08/2022/ND-CP). Under the auspices of the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE), a National EPR Council will be 
established to function as a supervisory authority which oversees the EPR-related activities in 
Vietnam. While these policy framework advances move Vietnam toward a circular economy, there 
are still questions related to the implementation of the proposed EPR framework that this Activity is 
expected to answer. 

 

The successful Applicant must work very closely with MONRE and the established National EPR 
Council to support the development of a mandatory recycling rate of certain types of products and 
packaging as described in the Decree 08/2022/ND-CP. 

 

The successful Applicant must conduct or/ and support research, data collection, quantitative and 
qualitative surveys, and analysis to inform the ongoing efforts of MONRE and the National EPR 
Council. Given that this is a new process for Vietnam, the Applicant must document the steps in the 
process and develop lessons learned to inform future relevant circular economy framework 
implementation efforts. It should be noted that the successful Applicant should develop specific 
activities and annual work plans in consultation and close collaboration with USAID, MONRE and 
the National EPR Council. 

 

Outcome 1.2: Wide range of stakeholders convened and EPR demonstrative scheme(s) 
designed 

 

A functioning EPR scheme relies on accurate data on plastic production, use, and import and 
throughout the plastic value chain to accurately set targets for plastic producers. In addition, the 
EPR demonstrative scheme(s) must be developed in consultation with a wide range of 


representatives, including large, medium, and small Vietnamese producers, importers, and 
recyclers, multinational companies, national and local government agencies, civil and community 
society organizations, NGOs, Academia, informal waste collectors, and residents. 

 

Receiving a commitment from the private sector, both Vietnamese and international, is important 
for the success of any EPR scheme to be developed and demonstrated. The successful Applicant 
must be able to bring private sector representatives and initiate a public-private partnership with a 
wide range of stakeholders such as plastic producers, importers, recyclers and representative from 
MONRE for developing a functional EPR scheme for at least TWO (2) of the plastic packaging 
categories identified in Decree 08/2022/ND-CP. The applicant shall lead and guide research on 
different EPR schemes, data collection for developing a baseline for the selected packaging 
products as well as socio-economic and customer surveys and analyses to support the development 
of and achieve commitment from the participating stakeholders on a feasible EPR demonstrative 
scheme(s) for the selected types of plastic packaging product(s). 

 

The introduction of any EPR scheme for plastic packaging might create a competition with the 
informal waste collectors and they might lose their livelihoods (OECD, 2016)14. Given the 
important roles different informal sector actors play in the waste management system in Vietnam, 
the successful Applicant must include the voices of the informal sector, especially women, into the 
public -private partnership to ensure that any proposed EPR programs do not harm the livelihoods 
of informal waste workers as well as to identify opportunities to strengthen the proposed EPR 
scheme(s) by involving the informal sector workers and women’ perspective in the design and later 
the implementation of the EPR demonstration scheme(s). 

14 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8278556/pdf/10.1177_0734242X211013412.pdf 

 

 

Outcome 1.3: EPR demonstrative scheme(s) implemented and learning captured 

 

Building upon the activities focused on in outcome 2, the successful Applicant must collectively 
implement the demonstrative EPR scheme(s) for selected plastic packaging product(s) and establish 
a collecting and reporting system in compliance with the requirements posed by the National EPR 
Council within the selected sub-national geographic area. In addition, the Applicant must document 
lessons learned and success factors to scale the demonstration EPR scheme(s) to other locations and 
plastic types. 

 

Activity Objective 2: Single use plastic (SUP) reduction measures are demonstrated 

 

This objective will be achieved through the following three outcomes: 
Outcome 2.1: Collective Action Initiatives and provincial level SUP reduction action plan 
established 

Outcome 2.2: Public awareness and education on SUP reduction measures increased 

Outcome 2.3: Monitoring and reporting system for compliance developed and learning captured 

 


Illustrative activities: The Applicant must creatively propose innovative and technical activities to 
achieve the outcomes under this objective and their success measured with the illustrative 
indicators. The illustrative activities may include but are not limited to the following: 

 

● Support the provincial and local people’s committees for developing and implementation of 
SUP action plan(s) and roadmap 
● Facilitate dialog with multi -sector stakeholders, conduct surveys, collect and analyze data 
to develop data -driven and collective action initiatives addressing SUP 
● Develop and execute data platforms and indicators to monitor and report the SUP state/ 
leakage in selected sub-national sites 
● Provide support to the sub-national government(s) to socialize SUP reduction measures for 
achieving social behavior change through awareness raising and educational campaigns 
among customers and different segments of the general population such as students, youth 
groups, etc. 
● Develop tools, methodologies for SUP reduction campaigns that can be replicated in 
different sectors and/or in different locations/geographic areas 


 

Illustrative measures of success for this objective may include but are not limited to the following: 

● Number of SUP reduction action plans developed (provincial and local) or number of SUP 
reduction models supported through USG assistance 
● Metric tons of plastic diverted from the environment based on SUP reduction models 
● Investment mobilized (in USD) for reducing SUP supported by USG assistance/ Value ($) 
of non-donor resources mobilized for local development priorities 
● Number of alternative products/ solutions for replacing the SUPs introduced and applied 
and/or number of innovations developed or supported through USG assistance. 
● Changes in SUP consumption behaviors among target populations as results of prioritized 
interventions. 


 

The work under this objective must support the implementation of Decision 889/QD-TTg (June 24, 
2020) approving the National Action Plan on sustainable production and consumption for the 
period 2021-2030, Decision 1316/QD-TTg (July 22, 2021) on approving the scheme on 
Strengthening Plastic Waste Management in Vietnam at provincial level (which support the 
implementation of the Decision 491/QD-TTg dated May 07, 2018 on adjusting the national strategy 
for integrated solid waste management to 2025, with a vision towards 2050)15. The Applicant must 
propose activities that are linked and build on each of the outcomes under this objective as well 
ensure that activities under Objective 2 complement and reinforce the activities and outcomes under 
Objective 1 and Objective 2. 

15 http://chinhphu.vn/portal/page/portal/chinhphu/hethongvanban?class_id=2&_page=1&mode=detail&document_id=203719 

 

Outcome 2.1: Collective Action Initiatives and provincial level SUP reduction action plan 
established 

 

While the GVN is outlining legislative steps for the reduction of SUP in Decision 491, 1316/QDTTg, 
the need to demonstrate how these measures will be collectively implemented on the ground is 


great. The successful Applicant must work at a sub-national level to bring together provincial and 
local level People’s committees, respective departments, private sector, NGOs, community 
organizations and citizens into Collective Action Initiatives platforms to support the development of 
provincial and local level SUP reduction action plan(s) and roadmap aligned with the directions and 
targets set by Decision 491, 1316/QD-TTg. The SUP reduction action plan(s) and roadmap should 
consider reduction and restriction policies (e.g., ban of plastic bags, reduction of use of plastic 
straws, fee to customers, fee on plastic bags distribution) as well as introduction of alternative 
products and packaging to replace SUP, as outlined in Decision 491,1316/QD-TTg. To ensure that 
SUP action plan(s) and policy instruments realistically achieve the targets for different types of 
SUP products outlined in Decision 491, 1316/QD-TTg, the successful Applicant must promote and 
support data driven - provincial policy framework through data collection and analysis to ensure 
that the developed SUP action plan(s) is data driven and sets realistic targets for different SUP 
product reduction. 

 

The collected data must be used to identify the sector(s) and/or sub-sector(s) in which the SUP 
reduction measures will be applied. Although the sector and sub-sector might vary based on 
geographic scope, the Applicant should consider sectors such as the restaurant sector, including 
fast-food establishments for onsite and take-out services, the tourism sector including hotels, and 
the retail sector, including shops, shopping malls, and consumers as outlined in the World Bank 
analysis of SUP in Vietnam16. 

16 World Bank presentation at Enhancing plastic waste management in Viet Nam – From policy to practice, November 9, 2021 

 

The successful Applicant must be able to incorporate the perspective from different public and 
private stakeholders and steer discussion and collaboration to receive agreement on selected SUP 
reduction measures. Specific steps on monitoring and reporting the success of these reduction 
measures must also be discussed and agreed among the members of the Collective Action 
Initiatives and reflected in the provincial SUP reduction action plan. 

 

Outcome 2.2: Public awareness and practices on SUP reduction increased 

 

The success of the SUP measures’ implementation outlined in the SUP reduction action plan will 
depend on changing business practices and customer’s behavior towards SUP reduction, therefore 
the successful Applicant must work with and support local sector(s) to innovatively build their 
awareness and education efforts in order to change their business practices and increase the 
acceptance and willingness of the consumers to comply with the selected SUP reduction measures. 
The successful Applicant is expected to facilitate and support a number of local initiatives/models 
that are collectively and jointly developed by multiple local actors and backed up by data and 
research specific to the local context. The successful Applicant must also develop best practice 
models and engage in awareness raising campaigns with a wide range of stakeholders to raise 
awareness around the proposed SUP reduction measures outlined in the SUP reduction action plan 
and educate business owners on the business and environmental benefits of reduction of SUP and 
customers and the general population on the impact of SUP to the environment, local economy, and 
human health in order to achieve sustained behavior change towards SUP reduction measures. 

 


Outcome 2.3: Monitoring and reporting system for compliance developed and learning 
captured 

 

For SUP reduction measures to be successful in changing the business and customers behavior 
change in selected sectors, the successful Applicant must develop and implement monitoring and 
reporting systems aligned with the SUP reduction measures to be able to efficiently measure the 
compliance of the business owners and customers. The Applicant must work closely with the local 
governments on the monitoring and reporting system to allow for capacity building of government 
officials to monitor the SUP reduction independently and insure the sustainability of the 
demonstrated measures. The Applicant must use a combination of standard and innovative 
approaches, including internet, social media to collect and analyze data, and include customer 
feedback information to keep business accountable for compliance of the SUP reduction measures. 
Lessons learned must be compiled and shared with other sectors across selected sites and/ or with 
other subnational levels interested in replicating the demonstrated SUP reduction measures. 

 

Activity Objective 3: Sub-national level Integrated SWM models developed and implemented 

 

This objective will be achieved through the following three outcomes: 

 

Outcome 3.1: Capacity and expertise to plan, finance, and implement integrated SWM models and 
programs built at the local-level 

 

Outcome 3.2: Waste reduction, waste separation, and recycling behavior change sustained 

 

Outcome 3.3: All members of the inclusive and equitable integrated SWM models empowered 

 

Illustrative activities: The applicant must creatively propose innovations and technical activities to 
achieve the outcomes under each objective and their success measurable with the illustrative 
indicators. The illustrative activities may include but are not limited to the following: 

 

● Conduct baseline analysis and identify opportunities for promising integrated SWM models 
● Test context appropriate technology 
● Collect data and support data driven policy around integrated SWM 
● Promote inclusive integration of informal waste collector sector 
● Provide support and build capacity of sub-national level government to develop integrated 
SWM plans, secure finance and sustain tested integrated SWM models 


 

Illustrative measures of success of the activity may include: 


● Metric tons of waste and recyclables aggregated as a result of USG assistance 
(disaggregated by type of waste) 
● Metric tons of plastic secured from leaking into the environment as a result of USG 
assistance 
● Number of households/establishments participating in 3R/SWM programs as a result of 
USG assistance. 
● Changes in behaviors among target populations as results of prioritized interventions. 



● Investment mobilized (in USD) for 3R/SWM infrastructure supported by USG assistance 
● Proportion of population in assisted urban areas with access to solid waste collection and/or 
recycling programs 
● Number of persons trained with USG assistance to advance outcomes consistent with gender 
equality or female empowerment through their roles in public or private sector institutions 
or organizations (GNDR-8) 
● Number of policies and regulations developed or supported that enable municipalities to 
implement integrated SWM models 


 

Outcome 3.1: Capacity and expertise to plan, finance, and implement integrated SWM 
models and programs built at the local-level 

 

An integrated solid waste management (SWM) model incorporates activities throughout the entire 
waste management hierarchy, including waste prevention, recycling, organics management, and 
proper disposal. These are all key steps in reducing plastic pollution and reducing the greenhouse 
gas emissions both from manufacturing products using virgin materials and from materials, 
particularly organics, entering dumps and landfills. Models for integrated SWM at the local level in 
Vietnam are needed, along with the appropriate local capacity and expertise to ensure long-term 
financing and implementation of these plans. 

 

The successful Applicant must work closely with key national- and local-level stakeholders to build 
and execute integrated SWM plans that are context-appropriate and sustainable. Plans should 
consider locally appropriate technologies for processing, recycling, and organics management, as 
well as any needs to ensure proper disposal of non-recyclable materials. 

 

The Applicant must work with stakeholders responsible for implementing these plans to ensure that 
data collection is in place to allow continuous assessment, improvement, and financing of the 
integrated SWM models. A key component of this will be working with municipalities to ensure 
that results-based incentives are a part of contracts with waste collectors, ensuring the availability of 
data for municipalities and encouraging collectors to divert waste to recycling and composting. 
Lessons learned must be compiled and shared with participating stakeholders, other relevant 
sectors, and other local-level stakeholders to encourage and inform replication of these models in 
other communities. 

 

Outcome 3.2: Waste reduction, waste separation, and recycling behavior change sustained 

 

Integrated SWM plans require participation from businesses, institutions, and individuals to be 
successful. The Applicant must work with key stakeholders in the communities in which integrated 
SWM models are developed and implemented to emplace positive 3Rs behaviors, including waste 
reduction, waste separation, and recycling. The Applicant must conduct formative research to 
confirm existing 3Rs behaviors in communities and to inform approaches to encouraging behavior 
change, which should consider innovative opportunities provided by social media and technology. 
Upon the completion of formative research, the Applicant must develop and implement 
communications and education strategies for target geographies that operationalize the key social 
and behavior change approaches indicated by the formative research. These approaches should 


operate in conjunction with the new integrated SWM models and should include plans for longterm 
successful and continuous behavior change. 

 

Outcome 3.3: All members of the inclusive and equitable integrated SWM models empowered 

 

Inclusive integrated SWM models incorporate all participants in the SWM system, including youth, 
women, and informal sector waste management workers. The successful Applicant must work with 
key stakeholders, including youth, women’s, and informal sector organizations to ensure that the 
integrated SWM models account for their needs and empower them to participate in 
implementation of these models. The Applicant must work with public and private sector 
stakeholders responsible for the enactment of the integrated SWM models to emphasize inclusivity 
and the incorporation of youth, women’s, and informal sector perspectives in the development and 
implementation of these models. 

 

A.5 Implementation Considerations 

 

Geographic Prioritization: Proposed geographic areas should be in urban environments proximal 
to waterways and/or the coast to maximize the impact on potential plastic waste leakage into the 
environment (large, urban areas where a major proportion of plastic is generated and used; caused 
severe damages to community health and economic developments; and the populations are most 
affected by plastic pollution challenges). The illustrative locations include (but not limited) to 
Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, Can Tho and Mekong Delta Areas. Geography should also consider the 
existence of previous and current programming from donors and other stakeholders addressing 
SWM and plastic pollution on which the activity could capitalize and build. 

 

The applicants will be expected to conduct an analysis to determine the most favorable geographies 
for this approach. The commitment of community, provincial, and governmental partners is integral 
for the success of this activity: therefore, the applicant’s proposal of target contexts will require the 
establishment of relationships with local leaders to ensure that environmental approaches reflect 
these actors’ priorities and willingness to collaborate. Applicants should propose provinces in 
Vietnam where their activities will take place. Applicants may propose geographic areas, but the 
final localities will be determined in consultation with USAID and the Ministry of Natural Resource 
and Environment after the award. 

 

CLA integration: USAID/Vietnam believes that a strong, systematic, intentional, and resourced 
approach to Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) is foundational for successful 
implementation of this Award. Each objective and outcome described above has a clear connection 
to CLA (e.g., dialogues, EPR scheme(s) design and implementation, SUP evidence generation and 
use). 

 

Given the process-oriented and novel nature of this activity, the Recipient will be expected to house 
a strong CLA function so that continuous learning, reflection, and feedback from stakeholders 
informs adjustments and changes in implementation. Throughout implementation, the Recipient 
will be expected to track learning (and adjust approaches accordingly) to produce tangible 
outcomes. The recipient must develop learning priorities as part of its Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation & Learning Plan (AMELP) with input from USAID to support the activity objectives 


and goal and will be expected to track the learning and adjust implementation approaches 
accordingly. 

 

The Recipient should be committed to updating their analyses at regular intervals in order to ensure 
that their understanding remains current to inform ongoing efforts (see reference to context-driven 
adaptation above).The Recipient will also use strong facilitation expertise to ensure effective 
collaboration with local partners and GVN counterparts. For more on collaboration, see the 
coordination and engagement section below. 

 

Overall, the Recipient is expected to create a learning-oriented culture that enables adaptive 
management, and is expected to adequately resource CLA approaches throughout implementation 
and recruit and build the capacity of staff to implement in this way. USAID will also provide 
flexibility to the implementer to adapt when learning indicates adjustments are necessary. 

 

Sub-Award: The Recipient will make sub-awards to local entities to implement collective action 
initiatives under SUP reduction plans and integrated SWM approaches in selected areas. The 
Recipient is encouraged to use co-creation approaches to identify sub-awardees. In addition, subawards 
can be provided to organizations serving the backbone function or other social organizations 
involved in the collective impact initiative. The Recipient will carry out risk assessments of subawardees; 
develop objectives, tasks, and performance standards with the sub-awardees; and monitor 
performance. At least 30% of the total Recipient’s budget is expected to be provided to subawardees. 


 

Gender and Social Inclusion: USAID/Vietnam has an explicit commitment to gender equality in 
all of its development activities. USAID’s Gender Equality and Women Empowerment (GEWE) 
Policy outline a vision for “... a prosperous and peaceful world in which women, girls, men, and 
boys enjoy equal economic, social, cultural, civil, and political rights and are equally empowered 
to secure better lives for themselves, their families, their communities, and their countries.” While 
in Vietnam women typically make decisions around purchasing products at markets and manage 
household waste, they are also highly represented in the formal and informal waste and recycling 
sector. A recent study by Ocean Conservancy cites that 84.6% of the informal recycling collectors 
and 69.7% of junk shop owners are women and further confirm gendered cultural stereotypes, 
discrimination, harassment and gender-based violence (GBV); a lack of access to markets, assets, 
and credit; and exclusion from governance, leadership, and decision-making are common issues 
that impede their economic empowerment 17. To ensure gender and social inclusion in the 
implementation and successfully reaching the outcomes, the successful Applicant must work with 
women and other underrepresented groups at the household level, with the informal waste sector as 
well as with the Vietnam Women’s Union to expand the economic opportunities under integrated 
SWM activities and ensure they are represented and their voices are heard during the decision 
making process under design and implementation of the EPR scheme(s), SUP reduction models, 
and integrated SWM models. 

17 Ocean Conservancy. The Role of Gender in Waste Management: Gender Perspectives on Waste in India, Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam. 2019. Accessible at 
https://oceanconservancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/The-Role-of-Gender-in-Waste-Management.pdf 

 

 

Social, environmental, and international organizations working with USAID should promote gender 


diversity and inclusion in their own workplaces, including opportunities for the inclusion, 
promotion, and leadership development of women and individuals from historically 
underrepresented communities. To ensure consistent gender integration and social inclusion, all 
activities must be aligned with the USAID’s GEWE Policy. Applicants must identify opportunities 
for increasing livelihood and other economic opportunities for women and reduce the negative 
impact on women and girls that could result from recycling, waste management activities and 
policy interventions. The successful Applicant must develop gender strategy and conduct a sitespecific 
gender analysis once the engagement sites are identified. Where appropriate, gender 
disaggregated data must be collected and reported. 

 

All people-level performance data should be disaggregated by sex and the Recipient is encouraged 
to explore a gender-sensitive approach while completing data reporting. USAID also encourages 
the Applicants to collect other disaggregated data related to identity and socioeconomic status to the 
extent that this data enhances the activity’s assessments and does not pose any vulnerabilities for 
the populations included in initial dialogues and surveys. Dedicated attention should be paid to 
ensure that groups engaged in the activity are not limited based on socioeconomic status, education, 
or individuals’ perceived value to the success of activity objectives. 

 

Coordination and Engagement: Given the nature of the work expected under this activity, the 
successful Applicant must develop a strong skill set and processes for coordinating and engaging 
with different stakeholders. 

● Coordination with GVN: The success of this Activity will rest on a strong partnership and 
collaboration with the GVN at the national and sub-national levels. The GVN is a critical 
stakeholder for achieving outcomes under the ERP, SUP reduction and integrated SWM 
system objectives and their engagement will advance the sustainability of this approach. 
● Private Sector Engagement: Private sector, specifically Vietnamese (small, medium and 
large) and international companies focused on plastic packaging, production of SUP or 
substitutes of SUP are expected to be key actors in designing and testing circular economy 
policy tools such as EPR and SUP. In addition, state-owned urban environment companies 
such as URENCOs or CITENCO who are in charge of collection, transport, treatment and 
disposal of waste in provinces and cities play an important role in the integrated SWM 
system the Activity is aiming to build in the selected sites. The successful Applicant must 
develop a strong understanding of key private sector actors, their power dynamics, 
relationships, and prevailing incentives/interests to support and engage in the 
implementation process in order to successfully reach the outcomes under all three 
objectives and outcomes. 
● Coordination with other USAID activities: The Activity will be coordinated closely with 
current USAID activities and partners in Vietnam. A high level of collaboration will be 
critical to ensure all activities are planned, coordinated and implemented in support of the 
USAID Vietnam Country Development Coordination Strategy. 
● Coordination with other Donors and Implementers: Other international development 
agencies such as World Bank (WB), German Agency for International Cooperation or 
(GIZ), UN, National plastic action partnership (NPAP), JICA, KOICA, embassies, and 
private donors, implementers are currently implementing a wide range of activities at 
national and sub-national level in Vietnam. The illustrative examples include (but not 
limited to): plastic policy analysis and plastic waste diagnostic by WB to support MONRE 



and GVN agencies in developing plastic waste management strategies, policies and priority 
investments (including for private sector solutions); Hue - the Plastic Smart City in the 
Central Annamites of Vietnam by WWF (with funding from Norwegian Government); 
Ending Plastic Pollution Innovation Challenge - EPPIC by UNDP in Halong Bay that aims 
to bring citizens, local governments, and the private sector together to identify pressing 
issues and collaborate to implement effective solutions; Switzerland supported “Sustainable 
Tourism Project'' that aims to improve the competitiveness of the tourism sector sustainably 
through implementation of responsible tourism practices; Promoting Action on Plastic 
Pollution from Source to Sea in Asia and the Pacific by ADB; etc. The Activity must 
describe its assessment and coordination plans with other donors and partner’s programs to 
ensure the planned activities are inclusive and supportive of collective action principles. 


 

Program Beneficiaries: The activity will aim to build partnerships with local organizations, 
USAID implementing partners and GVN to strengthen in-country institutions/organizations’ 
capacity for working collectively to improve access to reliable information, foster data utilization, 
and monitor the effect of interventions and policies on environmental impacts to human health in 
Vietnam. 

 

Sustainability: Strengthening the sustainability of locally defined and implemented development 
results is at the heart of the USAID programs. While there are no guarantees for sustained results, 
sustainability can be greatly enhanced by following principles of locally led development - listening 
to GVN and local actors, understanding local systems, taking the time to understand the context, 
following local leadership, fostering local ownership and commitment, and experimenting, learning 
and sharing. The applicant(s) should describe how they are applying these principles to enhance the 
sustainability of the outcomes of the program. 

 

Communication and compliance issues: The successful applicant(s) must use information 
generated by the Activity to inform and enrich public policy framework and, where appropriate, 
advocate for adaptation. The applicant(s) must describe how communication activities will be 
implemented to tell a tactical story demonstrating the value of local responses to plastic pollution 
problems. The applicant(s) must state how it will measure communication activities for 
effectiveness. Communications and outreach activities must be clearly reflected in annual work 
plans, be included in regular reporting, and be monitored for results. 

 

 

 

 [END OF SECTION A] 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1 ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 

 

Subject to funding availability, USAID intends to provide up to $21,400,000 in total USAID 
funding. 

 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this NOFO. USAID reserves 
the right to fund any one or none of the applications submitted. 

 

B.2 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 

 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five years, starting from [actual date to be filled in at 
the time of award]. 

 

B.3 SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 

 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID/Vietnam anticipates a close working partnership with the 
successful Applicant for this activity to assist in achieving the objectives. The specific areas of 
USAID involvement will include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Approval of the Recipient’s Annual Implementation Plans during performance by the designated 
Agreement Officer Representative (AOR); 

 

2. Approval of selection of Recipient Key Personnel: Key Personnel positions will be identified and 
stated in the award. The Recipient shall request prior approval from the USAID Agreement Officer 
(AO) for the replacement of key personnel or changes in the key personnel positions; 

 

3. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation: The Recipient must request prior 
review and written concurrence from the AOR and obtain review and written approval from the AO 
before entering into any sub-awards under the performance of this agreement; 

 

4. Approval of the Recipient’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan by the AOR. 

 

B.4 AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937. 

 

B.5 NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Vietnam Action 
Against Plastic Pollution which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 
responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective 
administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient 


will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying 
agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 
award profit to prime recipients and subrecipients under assistance instruments. However, while 
profit is not allowed for sub-awards, the prohibition does not apply when the recipient acquires 
goods and services in accordance with 2 CFR 200.317 -326, “Procurement Standards.” Forgone 
profit does not qualify as cost-share. 

 

Each applicant must be found to be a responsible entity before receiving an award. The Agreement 
Officer (AO) may determine that a pre-award survey is required in accordance with ADS 303.3.9.1 
to determine whether the applicant has the necessary organization, experience, accounting and 
operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with established U.S. Government standards, laws, and 
regulations. Applicants who do not currently meet all USAID requirements for systems and controls 
may still be eligible under special award considerations and should not be discouraged from 
applying. USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received 
financial assistance from USAID. The prime recipient is encouraged to promote involvement of 
“underutilized” partners and local organizations in the implementation of this activity. 

 

C.2 COST SHARING OR MATCHING 

 

USAID has established a minimum required cost share of 10% of the total estimated cost for this 

activity, which is approximately US$2,140,000, to be contributed throughout the life of the activity. 
Such funds may be mobilized from the recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation 
donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private businesses that 
contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities at the country level, but not from 
other USG funding sources. This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or 
other facilities or equipment which may be used for the activity, provided by the partner. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and cooperative agreements, please see the ADS 303.3.10 and 2 
CFR 200.306 for U.S. NGOs. For non-US NGOs, all cost sharing would be subject to the Required 
as Applicable Provision “Cost Sharing” in the Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 303, 
Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental Organizations. 

 

C.3 ELIGIBILITY OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR USAID FINANCING 

 

● Applicable Rules 


 

The recipient must comply with USAID’s Rules for Procurement of Commodities and Services 
Financed by USAID in 22 CFR 228 in the procurement and long-term lease (as defined in 22 CFR 
228.01) of goods and services with USAID funds. These rules govern the source of USAIDfinanced 
commodities and the nationality of suppliers of USAID-financed commodities and 
services, which must be in a country that is included in the authorized geographic code. These rules 


apply to the recipient’s procurement contracts (as defined in 2 CFR 200) with vendors and to 
subcontracts at all tiers under the recipient’s procurement contracts. 

 

● Sub-Awards 


 

These rules do not apply to sub-awards (as defined in 2 CFR 200.92) but do apply to the 
procurement and long-term lease of goods and services by sub-recipients (as defined in 2 CFR 
200.93) at all tiers, and to those sub-recipients’ procurement contracts and subcontracts with 
vendors at all tiers. These rules do not apply to procurement or long-term lease of goods and 
services with cost-sharing or program income funds. 

 

● Restricted Commodities 


 

“Restricted Commodities” are certain agricultural commodities, motor vehicles (excluding driver 
service), pharmaceuticals, condoms and contraceptives, pesticides, used equipment, and non-local 
purchase of fertilizer. Special rules apply to restricted commodities and are described in ADS 
312.3.3. 

 

C.4 ELIGIBILITY OF ACTIVITIES UNDER USAID’S ENVIRONMENTAL 
REGULATIONS 

 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental sustainability as 
a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate is 
codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200), which, in part, require 
that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 
Recipient environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are 
specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under this CA will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 
Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 
(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation.”). 

 

An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) Asia 22-015 (Attachment C) has been approved for 
Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution activity, which covers activities expected to be 
implemented under this agreement. USAID has determined that these do not have an effect on the 
natural or physical environment. 


 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in collaboration 
with the USAID Cognizant Technical Officer and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau 
Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities under this 
CA to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation. 

 

If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 

 

C.5 LIMITATIONS ON SUBMISSIONS 

 

Each applicant is limited to one application submission under this NOFO as the prime Applicant. 
There is no limitation on being included as a potential sub-awardee across multiple applications. 
The use of exclusive teaming arrangements is discouraged. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1. AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT 

 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr. Bryan Moody 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Vietnam 

15/F Tung Shing Square, 2 Ngo Quyen 

Hanoi, Vietnam 

Email: bmoody@usaid.gov 

 

The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Huyen Dang 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Vietnam 

15/F Tung Shing Square, 2 Ngo Quyen 

Hanoi, Vietnam 

Email: hdang@usaid.gov 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and any 
subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All applications must be submitted 
according to instructions contained in this NOFO. 

 

In order to maintain a fair and transparent funding opportunity, USAID maintains strict guidelines 
on who within USAID may be contacted regarding applications or questions about the opportunity. 
Applicants may only contact USAID via the email address provided above in this NOFO. Failure to 
comply with the USAID points of contact guidance mandated in the NOFO may disqualify the 
Applicant(s). 

 

D.2. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

 

Questions and requests for clarification regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to the 
Agency Points of Contact above no later than the date and time indicated on the cover page. 

 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on www.grants.gov, if 
that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to 
any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov for any amendments. 

 

D.3. SUBMISSION DATE AND TIME 

 


Applications must be submitted by email to points of contact stated in Section D.1 before the 
respective due dates and times on the cover page. Applicants must ensure that the applications are 
received at USAID/Vietnam in their entirety. No additions or modifications to submitted 
applications will be accepted after the closing date and time. Late applications will be considered 
only if the Agreement Officer determines it is in the Government’s interest. Each email submission 
may not exceed 15 MB in size. 

 

Hard copies, whether hand delivered or by postal mail, will not be accepted. 

 

If you do not receive an email confirmation for receipt of applications, please contact the point of 
contact at the email address noted above. 

 

D.4. APPLICANTS RESPONSIVENESS 

 

All applications received by the closing date and time will be reviewed for responsiveness to the 
specifications outlined in these guidelines and the application format. Section E: Application 
Review Information addresses technical evaluation application criteria. Applicants must review, 
understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may lead to the 
disqualification of an application. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary 
documentation is complete and received on time. 

 

D.5. APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 

 

Submission of Applications 

 

a. Applications must be submitted in two separate volumes: (a) Technical Application and (b) 
Cost/ Business Application, each of which must be organized by the headings set forth below 
and must include the information described below. The Technical application must address 
technical aspects only while the Cost Application must present the costs, and address risk and 
other related issues. 


 

b. The subject line of application submissions must reference the NOFO No. 72044022RFA00002 
and the title of the activity: Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution. The applicant must 
indicate in the subject line of the email if multiple emails are sent (e.g. “1 of 4”). 


 

c. Applications in response to this NOFO must be in English, and in U.S. dollars. 


 

Restriction on Disclosure and Use of Data 

 

a. Applicants that include in their applications data that they do not want disclosed to the public 
for any purpose, or used by the Government except for evaluation purposes shall: 

 

i. Mark the title page with the following legend: “This application includes data that shall 
not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed - 
in whole or in part - for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, 
a grant or cooperative agreement is awarded to this Applicant as a result of - or in 



connection with - the submission of this data, the Government shall have the right to 
duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data 
if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets [insert numbers or other identification of sheets]”; and 


 

ii. Mark each page containing restricted data with the following legend: “Use or disclosure 
of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 


 

b. Applicants are advised that it is anticipated that the successful program narrative, submitted as 
part of the technical application, will become the Program Description of the cooperative 
agreement awarded as a result of this NOFO. Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act of 
1981, the public is entitled to request information from Agency award files. As a general rule, 
information will be disclosed except: 

 

i. Information submitted in response to this NOFO, prior to award of the grant, or 
modifications or revisions thereto. 
ii. Information properly classified or administratively controlled by USAID. 
iii. Information specifically exempted from disclosure under the Freedom of Information 
Act. 


 

c. Upon award of the cooperative agreement resulting from this NOFO, USAID will disclose, use, 
or duplicate any information submitted in response to this NOFO to the extent provided in the 
award, and as required by the Freedom of Information Act. 

 

Pre-Award Audits/Surveys and Discussions 

 

USAID reserves the right to perform a pre-award audit/survey which may include but is not limited 
to: (1) interviews with individuals to establish their ability to perform award duties under project 
conditions; (2) a review of the Applicant's financial condition, business and personnel policies and 
procedures, etc.; and (3) site visits to the Applicant's institution. However, it must be understood 
that USAID undertakes no obligation to perform any of the foregoing elements. Accordingly, 
Applicants should submit their best and most complete application initially. 

 

Authority to Commit USAID 

 

The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit USAID to the expenditure 
of public funds. No costs allocable to the proposed award will be reimbursed by USAID before 
receipt of either a fully executed grant or cooperative agreement, or a specific written authorization 
from the Agreement Officer. 

 

D.6. TECHNICAL APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS 

 

(a) General 


 


Applicants must organize the application to follow the technical evaluation criteria specified in 
Section E. The page length for the application shall not exceed twenty-five (25) pages. Within these 
pages, the executive summary shall not exceed one (03) page. The only annexes to be evaluated are 
listed hereunder and are not subject to the page limitation. 

 

Technical application must be organized in the following manner: 

 

I. Executive Summary – not to exceed three (03) pages 
II. Technical Solution 
IV. Institutional Experience & Management Approach 
V. Key personnel and Staffing Plan 
V. Annexes - See below 


 

Annex A: Theory of Change and Illustrative Activity Approach and Timeline. 

Annex B: Staffing Pattern/ Organizational Chart, including title and position description of 
proposed key personnel positions. 

Annex C: Resumes and Letters of Commitment of the Chief of Party. 

Annex D: Partner Letters of Commitment, if any. 

 

(b) Limitations 


 

USAID will not evaluate information submitted in excess of the above stated page limits. The 
Technical Application shall be written in Time New Roman Font, 12-point size. The 12-point size 
requirement does not apply to text boxes, footnotes, tables, graphs and charts, though these should 
be used sparingly and not in place of basic text. Applicants shall use only 8.5 inch by 11-inch 
(210mm by 297mm) paper, with margins no less than one inch on each border. Number each page 
consecutively. 

 

Note: A page in the Technical Application that contains a table, chart, graph, etc., not otherwise 
explicitly excluded per the instruction, is subject to the page limitation. 

 

Not included in this page limitation are the following: 

 

● Cover Page – the Applicant must provide with the following information on the Cover Page: 


 

a. Name of the organization submitting the application; 
b. Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
c. Activity Title; 
d. Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 
e. Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303.6); 
f. Unique Entity ID (SAM). 





 

● Table of Contents 
● Acronym List 
● Annexes (as specified in D.7(a) above) 


 

Information from annexes should be summarized in the narrative of the Technical Application, as 
appropriate for the context of the narrative. 

 

(c) Content of the Technical Application 


 

Technical applications should include the sections and content below and should be directed at the 
program as described in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description. The technical application will 
be the critical item of consideration in selection of an Applicant for an award. The information 
provided in the technical application must be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The 
technical application must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the goals of this program and specify the specific results to be achieved. The merit review 
criteria set forth in Section E. Application Review Information of this NOFO indicate the relative 
importance of each criterion so that Applicants will know which areas require emphasis in the 
preparation of the technical application. Applicants are advised that lack of completeness or 
superficiality of the application may constitute grounds for excluding it from consideration. 

 

It is anticipated that a portion of the successful application will become the Program Description for 
the award resulting from this NOFO. Thus, applications submitted in response to this NOFO 
should, in addition to being responsive to the requirements described herein, be written in the active 
voice and in results-oriented terms in order to address what is proposed to be done; why it is 
proposed to be done, how it is proposed to be done, who will do it, where it will be done, when it 
will be done, and the anticipated results and impact. 

 

The Technical Application includes the information set forth below: 

 

1. Executive Summary (maximum 3 pages) 


 

A succinct summary of the Applicant’s overall activity description. 

 

2. Technical Solution [See Section E.2] 


 

The Technical Solution should clearly articulate the Applicant’s proposed activities to 
accomplish the objectives presented in the Funding Opportunity Description, focusing on what 
is technically and politically feasible within the five years of the Activity. The Applicant 
should not merely repeat what is already described in the Program Description (section A) but 
should convincingly describe how the Applicant proposes to achieve the Activity Objectives 
and expected outcomes, detailing the results to be achieved and methodology employed. The 
Applicant should demonstrate why the approach proposed is the most effective means to 
realize the Activity Objectives (section A.4) and how the Implementation Considerations 
(Section A.5), will be integrated to achieve Activity’s objectives and overall goal of reducing 
plastic pollution at source in Vietnam. 


 

The Applicant must include an initial theory of change to illustrate its understanding of the 
plastic pollution and waste management context in Vietnam and possible entry points for 
change to achieve the Activity’s Objectives. The Applicant is strongly encouraged to propose 
additional intermediate results, outcomes and innovative solutions that will contribute to 
fulfillment of the Activity’s objectives and goal. The Applicant is also encouraged to highlight 
the linkages between the Activity’s objectives through proposing activities that can contribute 
to achieving more than one objective, particularly the Collective Action. 

 

The Applicant must also include an illustrative timeline of the proposed activities with a brief 
description and examples of the expected activities, intermediate outputs and results, and 
clearly identify linkages between activities under each of the Activity’s Objectives. This 
timeline should venture beyond the information presented in Section A and demonstrate 
Applicants’ plan for implementing the award. The timeline should take into account at least 
six months for project approval before formal technical implementation can begin. 

 

The Applicant should describe how proposed interventions/innovations are expected to achieve 
the end-of-program goals, including a detailed description of the Applicant’s strategic approach 
to enable policy and institutional environments for the EPR and the “3Rs”, foster social 
behavior changes for recycling and reduced demand for single-use plastics, increase 
infrastructure investment and improve solid waste services, market development for locallyappropriate 
innovations and technologies, and integrate all members of the solid waste 
management (SWM) value chain in an inclusive, equitable system. 

 

The Applicant should describe their proposed approach to work collaboratively horizontally and 
vertically across national and local government structure, engage a wide range of stakeholders 
from the private sector, local organizations, NGOs, informal sector, and citizens, improve 
capacity and facilitate collective action approaches among relevant stakeholders. The Applicant 
should describe their intended approach to promote long-term sustainability following the end 
of USAID funding. 

 

The Applicant should describe how they are planning to use the sub-award mechanisms and 
cost share resources to coordinate and collaborate with USAID-funded and Other Donor 
programs working on ocean plastic pollution issues. 

 

The Applicant should outline their approach to integrate the Implementation Considerations 
(section A.5) into proposed activities. The Applicant must clearly describe (with specific 
examples) how it will implement Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) approaches 
throughout implementation. 

 

3. Institutional Experience & Management Approach [See Section E.2] 


The Applicant must demonstrate that it has the institutional capability – on its own or combined 
with that of partners – to plan, implement, and monitor the proposed Activity and experience 
managing similar work of comparable size, scale, duration, nature, and complexity required to 
successfully, efficiently, and effectively achieve the objectives outlined in the Section A. The 
Applicant must precisely describe its specific role(s) in implementing the experiences described 


and the development impact of the Activity. Also, the Applicant must articulate how the 
described institutional experience will enhance the likelihood of successful implementation of 
this activity and the applicant’s unique technical solution. 

The Applicant must clearly state the appropriateness of the comprehensive management strategy 
and plan, which highlights approaches for mobilizing staff and cost control, minimizes 
management costs, and reserves the highest possible level of funding for implementing this 
program. This may include leveraging of private sector resources and expertise. 

The Applicant’s approach must demonstrate how the Applicant will rapidly build a team of 
experts, possibly including consortium partners, that will engage with the GVN at the national 
and sub-national level to implement successfully and effectively all aspects of the proposed 
Activity, including selecting, managing, and monitoring sub-awards. 

4. Key Personnel and Staffing Plan [See Section E.2] 


 

a. Key Personnel: 


 

USAID/Vietnam determined that three (3) personnel positions are key for this award, including 
the Chief of Party. For this NOFO, the Applicant need only to identify by name the proposed 
Chief of Party. No other individual should be identified nor will be evaluated, but the positions 
will be included in the overall staffing plan as described below. The Recipient's key personnel 
should have experience with the core roles of the Recipient in previous programs. Staff must be 
politically savvy, adaptable and flexible, and able to create a supportive, adaptive learningoriented 
culture. 

 

USAID expects relevant staff to have the appropriate qualifications and experience to work as a 
team to manage a complex U.S. Government Program, especially the ability to bring in regional 
and international best practices in local governance, collective action, and environmental 
management, and to work effectively at every level of governance necessary. 

 

The Applicant is required to propose minimum requirements for their COP and deputy (DCOP). 
The minimum requirements should complement and enhance the technical and management 
approaches. It is expected that the COP and DCOP should have political savvy, excellent 
organizational and management skills, proven leadership abilities within a multi-partner 
initiative, and experience representing projects at high levels of policy engagement. 

 

The following skills and expertise should be largely found, collectively, within the Key 
Personnel and the management team structure: 

 

● Experience and expertise in facilitating multi-stakeholder collaboration such as collective 
impact or collective action 
● Experience and familiarity working in environmental and local capacity development in 
Vietnam 
● Knowledge of the legal and institutional context and frameworks for environmental 
management and pollution in Vietnam 



● Connections to and familiarity with environmentally-focused organizations, private sectors 
in Vietnam and government actors/managers at the central and provincial levels; strong 
coordination with development partners in Vietnam 
● Knowledge of and experience with policy reform with GVN leaders at the central and 
provincial level and non-governmental actors 
● Experience promoting effective shared data management related to plastic and 
environmental management challenges to demonstrate measurable progress and support 
evidence-based policy reform 
● Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) expertise with a strong focus on adaptive 
management 
● Experience fostering private sector partnerships and securing independent financing for 
environmental & sustainable development 
● Gender integration and social inclusion expertise 


 

b. Staffing Plan: 


 

Applicants must propose a staffing plan that convincingly demonstrates the Applicant’s 
ability to successfully implement the Activity. The Applicant must describe how the 
proposed Staffing Plan (including proposed COP) will ensure successful implementation 
and the approach by which local Vietnamese labor and expertise will be maximized. If 
more than one full-time expatriate is proposed, the Applicant must justify using more than 
one expatriate, as opposed to local Vietnamese professions. 

 

The Applicant must describe the division of roles and responsibilities between the applicant, 
sub-awardees and other resource organizations, if any, in implementing the activity. The 
Applicant shall describe staffing roles for any proposed sub-awardees with defined lines of 
management, supervisory authority, and technical responsibility. The staffing plan shall clearly 
and logically address how consultants will be used to complement full-time project staff and 
whether they will be local or expatriate staff. 


5. Annexes 


 

The Annexes should be labeled as noted below and do not count towards the Technical 
Application page limit. 

 

5.1 Annex A ⎼ Theory of Change and Illustrative Activity Approach and Timeline 

 

The Applicant must submit a Theory of Change Diagram; the diagram should not exceed one 
(1) page and must be in PDF format. 

 

The Applicant must also submit an Illustrative Activity approach and timeline related to the 
three activity objectives. The Applicant should plan in the timeline to obtain Project Approval 
from the GVN, which should take about six months. Note that project programmatic 
implementation generally cannot begin until Project Approval is received. The timeline should 
not exceed three (3) pages and should also be in PDF format. 

 


5.2 Annex B ⎼ Staffing Pattern/ Organizational Chart 

 

The Applicant must provide an organizational chart depicting its staffing plan including the 
chain of command among staff. The chart must specify which personnel, if any, are employed 
by a sub-awardee, if any. 

 

The title and position description of each of the three (3) key personnel positions proposed 
(including the Chief of Party) must be included in this Annex. 

 

5.3 Annex C - Resume and Letter of Commitment of the Chief of Party 

 

The submitted resume must include a minimum of five references with current email and 
telephone number contact information. It should be noted that USAID reserves the right to 
solicit references beyond those submitted. The resume may not exceed five pages and must, at 
a minimum, identify the start year and month and end year and month for each former/current 
employment listed. Also, a signed letter of commitment must be submitted for the Key Person 
proposed, indicating (a) his/her intention to serve for a stated term of the service [state the 
period in the letter], and (b) agreement to the compensation level which corresponds to the 
levels set forth in the cost application. 

 

5.4 Annex D ⎼ Partner Letters of Commitment 

 

Applicants who intend to establish a consortium or partnerships must include Letters of 
Commitment for all proposed entities/organizations in their application, indicating their 
anticipated roles in the activity. In addition, these partners should indicate their relevant 
experience and how their engagement will enhance the capacity of the Recipient to lead a 
successful collective impact approach. 

 

D.7. COST APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS 

 

The cost application must be submitted separately from the technical application. While no page 
limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible 
while still providing the necessary details. The cost (business) application must illustrate the entire 
period of performance, using the budget template provided in the Attachment A. 

 

The cost application must contain the following sections: 

 

1. Cover Page 
2. SF 424 Forms 
3. Budget and Budget Narrative 
4. Approval of Subawards 
5. Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 
6. Funding Restrictions 
7. Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the Recipient 
8. History of Performance 



1. Cover Page 














 

The Cost Application Cover Page must contain the same information as the Technical Application 
Cover Page. 

 

2. SF 424 Form(s) 














The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series; SF-424, SF-424A 
and SF-424B. Standard Forms and instructions can be found at the following link: 

https://www.grants.gov/forms/sf-424-family.html. 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

3. Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

While there is no page limit for this portion, the Applicant is encouraged to be as concise as 
possible, but still provide the following necessary details: 

 

• The budget to be presented under Cost/Business Application should relate to results specified 
in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description, and delineate the cost inputs or each result, 
and a disaggregation between the USAID (Federal Share) and cost-share (Non-federal share) 
of the total program cost. 
• The proposed budget should provide cost estimates for the management of the program 
(including program monitoring, baseline assessments and assessments for environmental 
compliance). Applicant should minimize their administrative and support costs for managing 
the project to maximize the funds available for project activities. 
• The breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to costs of, if applicable, 
headquarters, regional, country, and/or local offices. 
• The breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization or subcontractor/ 
subgrantee involved in the program. 
• The costs associated with external, expatriate technical assistance and those associated with 
local in-country technical assistance. 
• The breakdown of the financial and in-kind (cost share) contributions of all organizations 
involved in implementing this Activity. 
• Potential contributions of non-USAID or private commercial donors to this agreement. 
• A procurement plan for commodities. 


 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum (all 
formulas must be displayed, and the budget must not be locked): 

 

i. Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the Activity. 
ii. Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to determine 
that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the applicant’s 



Activity and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 
Subpart E. 
iii. Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out by 
budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the Activity. 


 

Budget Narrative: Applicants must provide a narrative justifying the unit rates for each cost 
category proposed with supporting information as further specified under the following cost 
categories. Any assumptions should be clearly stated. Applicants should keep in mind that it is their 
responsibility to ensure that the information provided is sufficient to provide a basis for USAID to 
determine that the costs proposed are reasonable and realistic. 

 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

• Personnel Salaries and Wages: Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary 
rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when 
proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all 
assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the 
proposed compensation is reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is 
paid for similar work in other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their 
established written policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do 
not address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative 
must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 


 

• Fringe Benefits: If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate that has been approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, such rate should be used and evidence of its approval should 
be provided. If a fringe benefit rate has not been so approved, the application should propose 
a rate and explain how the rate was determined. If the latter is used, the narrative should 
include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., unemployment 
insurance, workers compensation, health and life insurance, retirement, etc.) and the costs of 
each, expressed in dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

• Travel, Transportation and Per Diem: Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an 
attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

• Equipment & Supplies - Procurement or Rental of Goods Services, and Real Property must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any 
rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable 
property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 


• Subawards: Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is 
a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

• Contracts - refers to contract agreements the applicant anticipates having with other 
organizations to contract out portions of the activity (this does not apply to the acquisition of 
supplies, material, equipment, or general support services). 


 

• Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be 
provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis 
of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the cost 
share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the 
resulting award. 


 

• Other Direct Costs: This includes communications, report preparation costs, passports and 
visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, insurance (other than insurance included in the 
Applicant's fringe benefits), office rent abroad, etc. The Applicant should indicate the 
subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship 
to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. The narrative should provide 
a breakdown and support for all and each other direct costs. 


 

Note: Foreign Government Delegations to International Conferences: Funds in this 
agreement may not be used to finance the travel, per diem, hotel expenses, meals, conference 
fees or other conference costs for any member of a foreign government’s delegation to an 
international conference sponsored by a public international organization. 

 

• Indirect Costs: Indirect costs are costs which cannot be directly identified with a single 
contract or grant. The indirect costs are applied equitably across all of the business activities 
of the organization, according to the benefits each gains from them. Some examples of 
indirect costs are office space rental, utilities, and clerical and managerial staff salaries. To 
the extent that indirect costs are reasonable, allowable and allocable they are a legitimate cost 
of doing business payable under a U.S. Government contract or grant. In order to better 
understand indirect costs, please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. 


 

Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will charge all costs 
directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200. The 
application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable 
supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 

 

 

Method 

Eligibility 

Initial application requirements 

Direct Charge 
Only 

Any applicant 

See above on direct costs 

Existing 
Negotiated 

Any applicant 
with an 

Submit your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed 
practices. 




Indirect Cost 
Rate 
Agreement 
(NICRA) 

approved 
NICRA 

De minimis 
rate of 10% of 
modified total 
direct costs 
(MTDC) 

Any applicant 
that has never 
received a 
NICRA 

Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct 
costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently 
charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected 
must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such 
time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate for a rate, 
which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. 
The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges 
indirectly vs. directly. 

Indirect Costs 
Charged As A 
Fixed Amount 

Certain U.S. 
educational 
institutions & 
non U.S. nonprofit 
organizations 
may request, 
but approval is 
at the 
discretion of 
the AO 

Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following (For Education institutions, see 2 CFR 
200 App III): 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for previous fiscal 
year and estimates for the current year 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day 
operations of the organization, including categories such 
as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are 
identifiable to more than one program or activity(ies), 
such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and 
maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the 
previous fiscal year and estimates for the current year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably 
and consistently across all programs and activities of using 
a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity(ies) to which the cost applies. 


No current 
NICRA, but 
applicant has 
an indirect 
rate other than 
the de 
minimis 

Any applicant 
may request 
but approval is 
at the 
discretion of 
the Agency 

A NICRA may be negotiated after award at the discretion of 
the Agency. Provisional rates may be set forth in the contract 
subject to audit and finalization. The applicant must identify 
the indirect cost rate and base it is proposing. See USAID’s 
Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for 
further guidance. 



 

4. Approval of Subawards 














 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time 
of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• Unique Entity ID (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 



• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

5. Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for 
prior approval by the Agency. If the Applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost 
elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the Applicant 
must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost 
elements require prior written approval. 

 

6. Funding Restrictions 














 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

7. Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the Recipient 














 

The Applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application. 

 

a. The Applicant shall complete the required certifications and sign and date in the signature space 
provided. http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
b. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
c. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and 
Assistance (M/OAA). 
















 

8. History of Performance 














 


The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its costreimbursement 
contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, 
not to exceed three years as follows: 

 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award Number; 
● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three years; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work 
at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact 
information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 


 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain from any sources relevant information 
concerning an Applicant’s history of performance and may consider such information in its review 
of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award 
survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

D.8. SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT 

 

Given the recent transition from the data universal numbering system, or DUNS, to the new unique 
entity identifier, or unique entity ID/ UEI (SAM), DUNS number is no longer required going 
forward after April 04, 2022. USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has 
complied with all applicable unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that 
is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the 
Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

i. Be registered in the System for Award Management (SAM) before submitting its 
application. SAM is streamlining processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data 
multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make the process of doing business with the 
government more efficient (www.sam.gov); 
ii. Provide a valid UEI (SAM) in its application for the applicant and all proposed subrecipients 
and subcontractors. For sub-recipients and/ or subcontractors, they are only 
required to present a valid UEI; 
iii. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are encouraged 
to register early to be eligible to apply for this NOFO. If an Applicant has not fully complied with 
the requirements by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the 


applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

Applicants must set forth full, accurate, and complete information as required by this NOFO. The 
penalty for making false statements to the U.S. Government is prescribed in 18 U.S.C. 1001. 

 

D.9. PRE-AWARD COSTS 

 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.458 - Pre-award costs, Pre-award costs are those incurred prior to 
the effective date of the Federal award directly pursuant to the negotiation and in anticipation of the 
Federal award where such costs are necessary for efficient and timely performance of the scope of 
work. Such costs are allowable only to the extent that they would have been allowable if incurred 
after the date of the Federal award and only with the written approval of the Federal awarding 
agency. Pre-Award costs may be authorized at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. 

 

D.10. BRANDING STRATEGY AND MARKING PLAN (BS/MP) 

 

The Applicant is required to comply (and ensure compliance by partners) with USAID’s branding 
and marking requirements set forth in 2 CFR 700.16. These regulations and provisions include the 
requirement for the apparently successful Applicant to submit a BS/MP for pre-award review, 
negotiation, and approval by the Agreement Officer. Under these regulations and provisions, the 
BS/MP does not need to be submitted until the Applicant is notified by the Agreement Officer that 
it is the apparently successful Applicant, and is requested to submit the BS/MP by a time specified 
by the Agreement Officer. Thus, the initial cost/business application is not required to include a 
BS/MP. Nevertheless, Applicants are encouraged, but are not required, to submit their BS/MP with 
their initial cost/business applications. Applicants who choose not to include their BS/MP with their 
initial cost/business application will not be penalized during the evaluation process, but should be 
aware that, if the Applicant is the apparently successful Applicant, the Applicant will be required to 
submit an acceptable BS/MP as a prerequisite for any resulting award. This would delay any such 
award, pending receipt, review, and, if necessary, negotiation of the Applicant’s BS/MP. Moreover, 
because USAID’s branding and marking requirements have cost implications, such costs must be 
included in the detailed budget even if the Applicant does not submit its BS/MP with the initial 
cost/business application. 

 

Failure to submit or negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time specified by the Agreement 
Officer may make the Apparently Successful Applicant ineligible for award. The proposed 
Branding Strategy and Marking Plan (BS/MP) will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement 
Officer shall review for adequacy the proposed BS/MP, and will negotiate, approve, and include the 
BS/MP in the award. 

 


Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it 
is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 




 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 




 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found 
on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of 
the RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 
(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use 
of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 






 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 





 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 




 

(i) Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 
country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 
forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is 
from the American People.” 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support 
this project or program. 






 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 




 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, 
and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 




 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 


 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that 
will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, 
with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the 
Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of 
the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute 
logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 



portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 
the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the 
award, including: 




 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio- visual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, 
informational, media, or communications products funded by USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the 
USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise 
acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 






 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 




 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 
and where the applicant will place the marking; 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 






 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation 
of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 




 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or 
program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the 
award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of 
material for which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 







recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant 
must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 
particular item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or 
product. 
(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 
or commodity would impair its functionality. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 
must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm 
or otherwise be inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 






 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure 
the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, and 
will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

D.11. CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits the applications. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 
ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 


 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 


limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to nonpublic 
information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

 

D.12. PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 

 

Upon consideration of award or during the discussions leading to an award, the selected Applicant 
may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the Agreement Officer 
to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. 

 

IMPORTANT NOTE 

 

Applicants should not submit the information below with their Applications. The information in this 
section is provided so that Applicants may become familiar with additional documentation that may 
be requested by the AO before award in order to make the responsibility determination: 

 

These documents may include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Audited financial statements for the past three (3) years that have been audited by a certified 
public accountant or other auditor satisfactory to USAID; 

 

2. Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable; 

 

3. Copies of organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting manual and 
personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, leave, differentials, 
etc., and indicate whether such policies and procedures have been reviewed and approved by 
any agency of the Federal Government. If so, provide the name, address, and phone number of 
the cognizant reviewing official; 

 

4. Other documentation, as required by the Agreement Officer, to substantiate that the Applicant: 

 

● Has adequate financial resources or the ability to obtain such resources as required during 
the performance of the Cooperative Agreement; 
● Has the ability to comply with the award’s terms and conditions, taking into account all 
existing and currently prospective commitments of the Applicant, non-governmental and 
governmental; 
● Has a satisfactory record of performance. Past relevant unsatisfactory performance is 
ordinarily sufficient to justify a finding of non-responsibility, unless there is clear evidence 
of subsequent satisfactory performance; 
● Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; 
● Is otherwise qualified and eligible to receive a Cooperative Agreement/Grant under 
applicable laws and regulations (e.g., Equal Employment Opportunity Laws). 


 


An award may be made only by the Agreement Officer after making a positive responsibility 
determination that the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management 
competence in planning and carrying out assistance programs, specifically the proposed Activity; 
and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets 
provided by USAID. 

 

For organizations that are new to working with USAID or for organizations with outstanding audit 
findings, or otherwise at USAID’s discretion, USAID may perform a pre-award survey to assess the 
Applicant’s management and financial capabilities. If notified by USAID that a pre-award survey is 
necessary, Applicants must prepare, in advance, the required information and documents. See ADS 
303.3.9.1 at https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303 for more information on pre-award surveys. 
Please note that a pre-award survey does not commit USAID to make any award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 CRITERIA 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed herein are tailored to the requirements of this NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

As outlined in Section C.2, there is a minimum required cost share for this activity. Applications 
that do not meet the minimum cost share requirement may not be eligible for award consideration. 
While it is a minimum requirement for eligibility, cost share will not be considered in the merit 
review criteria. 

 

E.2 TECHNICAL EVALUATION FACTORS 

 

Technical applications will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using the criteria 
shown in this Section. The criteria below are presented by major categories and in descending 
order of importance so that the Applicants know which areas require emphasis in the preparation 
of the applications. 

 

DESCENDING 
ORDER 

FACTOR NAME 

1 

Technical Solution 

2 

Institutional Experience & 
Management Approach 

3 

Staffing Plan and Key Personnel 



 

E.2.1 Technical Solution (See Section D.6) 










 

The Applicants’ Technical Solution will be evaluated based on the following: 

 

● Strong technical understanding of ocean plastic pollution challenges as relate to plastic and 
solid waste management, circular economy policies tools (i.e. EPR and SUP reduction 
measures), CLA, capacity building of local governments and organizations for integrated 
SWM models, and a demonstrated ability of working with wide range stakeholders, 
including national and local governments, toward a common objectives. 
● Achievable and ambitious results which have practical linkages with technical approaches. 
● A clear description of the theory of change and understanding of the activity purpose 
objectives and expected outcomes. 
● Consideration of gender, youth, and informal waste collectors well integrated into the 
Activity: A strong understanding of women’s role in recycling and waste management and 
potential for women's empowerment. 



 

E.2.2 Institutional Experience & Management Approach (See Section D.6) 










 

The Applicant’s Institutional Experience & Management Approach will be evaluated based on 
the following: 

● Demonstrated capacity and relevant experience of the Prime Applicant and its subpartners to 
plan, implement, and monitor complex activities requiring coordination with the GVN and 
other stakeholders. 
● Demonstrated management approach of the Applicant’s and its subpartners, including 
technical breadth, managerial capability, and ability to coordinate with a large range of 
stakeholders. 
● Demonstrated institutional ability and management approach in managing sub-awards and 
coordinating with sub-awardees to implement the proposed activity adaptively and 
successfully. 
E.2.3 Staffing Plan & Key Personnel (See Section D.6) 











 

The Applicant’s Staffing Plan & Key Personnel will be evaluated based on following: 

 

● The extent to which the proposed staffing plan and key personnel convincingly demonstrate 
the managerial and technical ability to effectively manage and implement the proposed 
activity adaptively and successfully. 


 

E.3 COST/BUSINESS APPLICATION EVALUATION 

 

This review will determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the cost principles 
found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. USAID will also consider (1) the extent of the Applicant’s 
understanding of the financial aspects of the program and the Applicant’s ability to perform the 
activities within the amount requested; (2) whether the Applicant’s plans will achieve the program 
objectives with reasonable economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating 
to costs should be included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 200.306, 
2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision “Cost Sharing (Matching)” for U.S. entities, or the 
Standard Provision “Cost Share” for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient 
has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial 
resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the 
program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk 
assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific 
conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 


E.4 DETERMINATION OF AWARD 

 

The submitted technical information will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using 
the criteria shown above. The cost/business application will be reviewed by the Agreement 
Officer/Agreement Specialist. As a result of this process, USAID intends to select the apparently 
successful recipient based upon the initial application submission. Once the selection is made, the 
Government may address any concerns to the selected recipient for resolution. However, the 
Government reserves the right to negotiate with all applicants prior to selection of the successful 
recipient if in the best interest of the Government. 

 

If USAID and the apparently successful Applicant cannot come to a mutual understanding during 
the course of discussions, or if the apparently successful Applicant is unable to provide satisfactory 
Technical and Cost Applications, or does not meet deadlines for submissions, or presents an 
unacceptable risk as a result of the risk assessment, then the Agreement Officer may designate the 
next highest-evaluated Applicant as the apparently successful Applicant. This decision is at the sole 
discretion of the Agreement Officer. The Agreement Officer’s decision regarding funding of an 
award is final and not subject to review. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1 FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential Applicant is hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

F.2 ADMINISTRATION 

 

Awards will be made under relevant federal regulations and agency policy. For U.S nongovernmental 
organizations, awards must be administered according to 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, 
and USAID Standard Provisions will apply (https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa). For 
non U.S. non- governmental organizations, USAID provisions for non U.S. non-government 
organizations will apply (https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

F.3 PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL REPORTING 

 

Financial reporting requirements will depend on the method of payment. Recipients will comply 
with the financial reporting requirements set forth in the USAID standard provisions. If advance 
payments are provided, reporting periods are calendar quarters or parts thereof. Quarterly financial 
reports are due not later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. If payment is on a 
reimbursement basis, financial reports may be submitted monthly, but not less frequently than 30 
days after the end of each calendar quarter. Regardless of whether payments are on an advance or 
reimbursement basis, the final financial report is due not later than 90 days after the estimated 
completion date of the award. The Recipient shall also comply with the USAID standard provision 
entitled “Reporting Host Government Taxes.” 

 

F.4 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

 

Program Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

 

All written documentation must be submitted in professional-level English. The reports listed below 
are the initial reports required by the recipient. Based on the evolving nature of the agreement, 
USAID may provide modified reporting requirements. 

 

Note: USAID’s fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30. Four fiscal quarterly 

periods begin on October 1, January 1, April 1, and July 1. 


Reports and Deliverables 

Due Dates 

Delivery 

1. Project Approval 


Immediately following the award, 
the Recipient shall initiate the 
process to obtain the project 
approval from GVN. 

Project Approval 

2. Activity Start-up Plan 


Within 60 calendar days after award. 
The plan should outline the 
Recipients plan for project approval, 
staffing, analyses, start-up workshop 
and work plan and CLA approach 
preparation. 

Electronically 

AOR 

3. Start-up workshop 


Within 100 calendar days after award 
to inform activity theory of change, 
work plan, and CLA approach. 

Workshop with USAID 
and relevant partners 

4. Annual Work Plan 


First work plan – 120 calendar day 
after the award 

 

Subsequent annual work plans due 
September 1 of each subsequent 
Agreement year 

Electronically 

AOR 

5. Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning 
(MEL) Plan 


120 calendar day after the award. 

Electronically 

AOR 

6. Quarterly Progress 
Reports 


By March 31st, June 30th, September 
15th and December 31st of each year 

Electronically 

AOR 

Financial Analyst Team 

7. Quarterly Pause and 
Reflect Sessions 


Due dates for the quarterly pauseand-
reflect sessions and reports will 
be finalized in consultation with 
USAID, with the first session 
expected after completing the first 
three months of the activity. 

Workshop with USAID 
and relevant partners 

8. Annual Pause and Reflect 
Sessions 


Planned and facilitated as a key input 
to the annual work plan and annual 
performance report. 

Workshop with USAID 
and relevant partners 

9. Annual Performance 
Report 


October 30th of each year 

Electronically 

AOR 




10. Final Report 


30 calendar days prior to the end of 
the Agreement 

Electronically 

AOR 

11. Financial reports 


Quarterly financial report: 30 
calendar days after the end of each 
USG fiscal quarter 

Final financial report: 90 days 
following the expiration of the award 

Electronically 

COR 

Financial Analyst Team 



 

1. Project approval - - In order to fully implement the activity, the Recipient is required to 
comply with Vietnamese requirements for project approval to fully implement this Activity in 
Vietnam. Project approval is expected to take approximately six (06) months, as such the 
Recipient is requested to initiate the process immediately following award. While seeking 
project approval, in close consultation with the AOR, the Recipient shall consider staffing and 
related consequence impacting implementation to ensure an efficient use of resources. 


 

2. Activity Start-up Plan - The Recipient will submit an activity start-up plan to identify plans 
for the project approval, start-up workshop, the work plan and the CLA approach. The activity 
start-up plan should also identify any initial assessments planned by the Recipient. More 
details on the format of the start-up plan will be provided after award. 


 

3. Start-up Workshop - The Recipient will hold a workshop that includes USAID staff and 
relevant partners to guide development of the first year work plan, activity theory of change 
and CLA approach. The workshop will also serve to define format and requirements for 
deliverables and reporting. The objective of the workshop is to provide a dedicated forum for 
the activity consortium, USAID staff and other relevant partners to collaborate to refine the 
submitted technical approach, theory of change, and CLA approach. Note, at the discretion of 
the AOR, this workshop may include or be done collectively with other mission implementing 
partners working on environmental pollution challenges. 


 

4. Annual Work Plan - The annual work plan details how the Recipient will use the work plan 
year effectively to achieve the activity objectives and strategic approaches. The work plan 
serves as a guide to program implementation and, once approved, represents an agreement as 
to the objectives and timing of specific tasks and interventions. The work plan is intended to be 
an annual roadmap for USAID and the Recipient. It should be closely aligned to the theory of 
change agreed upon during the start-up workshop, and clearly explain how the actions and 
outputs will lead to the expected outcomes identified in the theory of change. A Collaborating, 
Learning & Adapting (CLA) approach should form the basis of the work plan; CLA is required 
at each stage of implementation of the activity. This CLA approach will be expected to ensure 
that the activity is strategically coordinated with relevant actors, grounded in a strong evidence 
base, and iteratively adapted to remain relevant throughout implementation. The CLA 
approach should identify the Recipient’s plans for identifying the most appropriate local actors 
to collaborate with, facilitating multi-stakeholder collaboration, assessing implementation 
progress and challenges, using evidence and data in programming, identifying and prioritizing 
emerging opportunities for USAID and other leaders on environmental pollution issues in 
Vietnam, and how it will adjust programming based on new learning or changes in context. 



The Recipient will consult with USAID to finalize their CLA approach. More details on the 
format of the work plan will be provided after award. 


 

To provide flexibility to the Recipient, significant deviations from the work plan can be 
documented in a semi-annual addendum to enable adjustments to implementation based on 
learning. 

 

5. Activity Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (MEL) - In accordance with USAID policy, the 
Recipient will submit an Activity MEL Plan demonstrating the activity’s monitoring approach 
and relevant performance indicators of activity outputs; plans for collaborating on external 
evaluations; proposed internal evaluations and learning activities; and the Recipient’s proposed 
roles for MEL actions. The MEL plan should flow logically from the CLA approaches 
identified in the work plan and should be framed by, and closely aligned with, the agreed-upon 
activity theory of change. The MEL plan reflects the award progress over the life of the 
Activity and is a critical tool for planning, managing, evaluating performance, and learning. 
Findings from the MEL should be reviewed and validated in annual pause-and reflect-sessions 
with USAID staff, and revised when appropriate in consultation with the AOR. More details on 
the format of the MEL plan will be provided after award. 


 

6. Quarterly Performance Reports - The Recipient will submit quarterly performance reports to 
reflect progress, the activities of the preceding three months and lessons learned. The report 
must describe the tasks completed in the last three months relative to what was anticipated in 
the approved work plan, and will assess the overall activity impact to date relative to the 
performance indicator targets and results defined in the activity theory of change. More details 
on the format of the quarterly performance reports will be provided after award. 


 

7. Quarterly Pause-and-Reflect (QPR) Sessions - As an input to the quarterly reports, the 
Recipient will also be expected to hold quarterly pause and reflect sessions that include USAID 
and, when relevant, local actors and partners. The Recipient will be responsible for designing 
and facilitating sessions and will consult USAID in the design. 


 

8. Annual Pause-and-Reflect Sessions (APR) - Annual pause and reflect (APR) sessions should 
precede and inform the development of the annual work plan and annual performance report. 
These will form the basis for a management review conducted by USAID and program staff to 
assess: program directions, priorities, achievements, and prior year implementation results; 
management and implementation impediments; and recommendations for adaptive 
management actions. The format, participation and final output of the APR will be defined 
through consultation with the AOR and can entail a series of internal meetings, a multi-day 
workshop, or a brief report to summarize learning and major conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the actions and strategic approaches to achieve the activity objectives. The 
APR may be used to suggest refinements or updates to the activity theory of change, CLA 
approach, and subsequent annual work plans. Note, at the discretion of the AOR, APRs may 
include or be done collectively with other mission implementing partners working on 
environmental pollution challenges. Note that the APR replaces one of the quarterly pause and 
reflect sessions. 


 


9. Annual Performance Report – Annual Performance Report will negate the need for a fourth 
Quarterly Performance Report. Annual performance reports will summarize actions, progress 
and results during the year in relation to the approved work plan and the activity theory of 
change it supports. The report should include lessons learned, proposed adaptive management 
shifts, and proposed updates to the theory of change. The annual performance report will be 
used by USAID to assess the status of activity implementation. Each annual performance 
report will include an assessment as to whether the activity strategic approaches and actions are 
leading to the activity objectives. The annual performance report will cover all of the items 
included in the quarterly performance report, with a focus on the Activity results over the 
entire year. More details on the format of the annual performance report will be provided after 
award. 


 

10. Final Report - The Final Report must discuss all strategic approaches and results from the 
start of the award through its completion. More details on the format of the final report will be 
provided after award. 


 

11. Financial Reports: Financial Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard 
Provisions. 


 

Quarterly Financial Report: Quarterly Financial Reports shall be due within 30 days 
following the end of each quarter corresponding to USAID’s fiscal year from October 1 
through September 30. 

 

Final Financial Report 

 

The Final Financial Report shall be due within 90 days following the expiration of the award. 
Financial Reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700. USAID requires recipients to use 
the Standard Form 425 or Standard Form 425a, Federal Financial Report, or such other forms 
authorized for obtaining financial information as may be approved by OMB. 

 

Financial reports shall be submitted as follows: Financial Analyst, Office of Financial 
Management (email: hanoiusaidfa@usaid.gov) and the AOR. 

 

F.5 SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION 

 

USAID recipients must submit one electronic copy of development experience documentation to 
the Development Experience Clearinghouse. Development experience documentation may be 
submitted online: http://dec.usaid.gov. Or by mail (for pouch delivery): 

 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

Phone: (202) 712-0579 

Email: docsubmit@usaid.gov 

 


In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR for the award. 

 

F.6 PROGRAM INCOME 

 

Program Income earned under the resultant award will be added to the Total Estimated 

Amount (exclusive of cost share) in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307(e)(2). 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 

 

 


ATTACHMENT A: BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

The budget is the financial expression of the Activity. The following template represents an 
example of what USAID anticipates receiving in an Activity budget with Application submission. 

 

NOFO No. 72044022RFA00002 

Vietnam Action Against Plastic Pollution 

 

 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year … 

Total 5 years 

Cost Element 

Unit 

Amt 
(US$) 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

Unit 

Amt 
US$ 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

… 

… 

… 

… 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

Total Direct Labor 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Headquarter 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Salary/Wages 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Country Office(s) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Salary/Wages 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Consultants 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Travel, Transportation 
and Per Diem 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contractual (Subawards 
and Contracts) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawardee A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawardee B 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

…. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cost Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Estimated Costs 
Plus Cost Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

[END OF ATTACHMENT A] 

 

 


ATTACHMENT B: STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 
The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that is 
selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory and 
required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

x 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

x 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

x 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 

 

x 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

x 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

x 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

x 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 

 

x 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

x 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

x 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

x 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

x 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

x 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 




 

x 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

x 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

x 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

x 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

x 

 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

x 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

x 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

x 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

x 

RAA29. RESERVED 

x 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

x 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Require 
d 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

x 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

x 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

x 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

x 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

x 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

x 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

x 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

x 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

x 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 




x 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

x 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

x 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

x 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

x 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

x 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

x 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

x 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

x 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

x 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

x 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

x 

RAA30. RESERVED 

 

x 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

[END OF ATTACHMENT B] 

 

 


ATTACHMENT C: INNITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 

 

 

[The document is inserted in the following pages] 


