 

 

Issue Date: March 05, 2021 

Deadline for Question Clarifications: March 15, 2021 

Closing Date: April 08, 2021 (09:00 am, Hanoi Time) 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number: 72044021RFA00003 

 

Activity Title: USAID Partnership for Higher Education Reform 

 

 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Vietnam (USAID/Vietnam) is 
seeking applications for a Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the “USAID 
Partnership for Higher Education Reform” activity. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 
The authority for the NOFO is found in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the responsible applicant whose application best meets the 
requirements of this NOFO and the Merit Review Criteria contained herein. While one award is 
anticipated as a result of this Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), USAID reserves the right to 
fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

 

Applicants under consideration for an award that have never received funding from USAID may be 
subject to a pre-award audit to determine fiscal responsibility, ensure adequacy of financial controls, 
and establish an indirect cost rate. 

 

For the purposes of this NOFO the term “Grant” is synonymous with “Cooperative Agreement”; 
“Grantee” is synonymous with “Recipient”; and “Grant Officer” is synonymous with “Agreement 
Officer”. Eligible organizations interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
funding opportunity thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and evaluation process. The successful applicant will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. Please be sure to include the proposed amount 
of cost share in your budget and note that a cost share of 10% of the total estimated cost for this 

Activity is required (See Section C.2). This funding opportunity is posted on www.grants.gov, and may 
be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the website to ensure they have the latest 
information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity. It is the responsibility of the applicant to 
ensure that the entire NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety and USAID bears no 
responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion processes. If you have 
difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov 
Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 


USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.10. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for questions 
is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to all potential 
applicants through an amendment to this notice posted on www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part 
of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation 
or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of 
the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 /s/ 

 

Bruce Gelband 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition & Assistance 

USAID/Vietnam 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
SECTION A: FUNDING OPPORTUNITY DESCRIPTION ....................................................... 5 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ................................................................. 16 
B.1 ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED ....................................................................................................................... 16 
B.2 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE .......................................................................................... 16 
B.3 SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT ................................................................................... 16 
B.4 AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE ............................................................................ 16 
B.5 NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT ....... 16 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ........................................................................... 18 
C.1 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS .................................................................................................. 18 
C.2 COST SHARING OR MATCHING ................................................................................... 18 
C.3 ELIGIBILITY OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR USAID FINANCING ...................... 18 
C.4 ELIGIBILITY OF ACTIVITIES UNDER USAID’S ENVIRONMENTAL 
REGULATIONS............................................................................................................................ 19 
C.5 LIMITATIONS ON SUBMISSIONS ................................................................................. 20 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ..................................... 21 
D.1 AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT ..................................................................................... 21 
D.2 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ......................................................................................... 21 
D.3 SUBMISSION DATE AND TIME .................................................................................... 21 
D.4 APPLICANTS RESPONSIVENESS .................................................................................. 22 
D.5 APPLICATION PROCESS ................................................................................................ 22 
D.6 SUMMARY APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES ......................................... 23 
D.7 SUMMARY TECHNICAL APPLICATION ..................................................................... 25 
D.8 SUMMARY BUDGET ....................................................................................................... 30 
D.9 FUNDING RESTRICTIONS .............................................................................................. 31 
D.10 UNIQUE ENTITY IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT .. 31 
D.11 PRE-AWARD COSTS .................................................................................................... 32 
D.12 CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) .......................... 32 
D.13 PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 32 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ....................................................... 35 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ............................ 37 
F.1 FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES ......................................................................................... 37 
F.2 ADMINISTRATION .......................................................................................................... 37 
 F.3 PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL REPORTING .................................................................. 37 
F.4 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................... 37 
F.5 SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION ............. 41 
F.6 PROGRAM INCOME ........................................................................................................ 41 
REFERENCES .......................................................................................... 42 
SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE ....................................................... 43 
FULL APPLICATION FORMAT ........................................................... 44 
FULL APPLICATION BUDGET TEMPLATE .................................... 54 
PLANNED PRE-AWARD SCHEDULE ................................................. 55 
STANDARD PROVISIONS ..................................................................... 56 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR REGISTRATION IN DUNS AND SAM.GOV 
59 


 


SECTION A: FUNDING OPPORTUNITY DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

A.1 BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 


 

Higher Education in Vietnam 

 

Vietnam aspires to become a middle-income country, driven by innovation, a dynamic workforce, 
and increasing competitiveness in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The Government of Vietnam 
(GVN) and the Vietnam private sector have recognized that higher education reforms to date have 
not been sufficient to meet the country's growing demand for a highly educated and skilled 
workforce. Modernization of higher education to meet the needs of the country’s industrialization in 
a global environment remains the highest priority. 

 

The higher education sector in Vietnam has made extraordinary progress and shows great promise 
for continued development. There is a unique convergence of forces building within Vietnam over 
the past few years, including the 2018 Revised Higher Law and subsequent guidance, that will 
dramatically change and reshape Vietnam’s Higher Education system. These forces and trends 
include: dramatic growth, significant government reform and autonomization efforts, innovation 
ecosystem development and coalescence, push for privatization of higher education, evolving 
workforce needs, demand for curriculum and pedagogy reform, the need for dynamic university 
management, the government push for global recognition, and the economy’s demand for increased 
research and development. Vietnam’s education system exists on a spectrum and is eager to engage 
on the worldwide stage. 

 

Dramatic Growth. The size of the higher education sector has been increasing at a dramatic pace, 
from just over one million students in 2002, to 1.6 million in 20181. Similarly, the number of 
universities and colleges has grown, with as many as 442 institutes of higher education and 237 
recognized public and private universities currently operating. While the number of private 
universities has been growing, the public higher education sector continues to dominate and 
accounts for approximately 83 percent of all higher education enrollments, with 51 percent of the 
2018 student population being female. 

1 https://www.gso.gov.vn/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Nien-giam-thong-ke-day-du-2019.pdf 

 

Significant Government Reforms & Autonomization Efforts. Reform of the higher education 
sector began in earnest in the early 1990s. In a landmark Prime Ministerial decree (Decree No. 
90/NĐ-TTg), a process of moving away from tightly controlled universities was initiated and two 
national universities were established by means of mergers and authorized to provide a 
comprehensive range of study programs and to engage in research. In 2005, the Higher Education 
Reform Agenda (HERA) proposed a raft of changes, including a commitment to remove line-
management control of public Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) by government ministries, the 


expansion of enrolments, the creation of ‘research-oriented’ universities, and an increase in the 
proportion of academic staff members holding Ph.D. qualifications. Reform and autonomization 
continues to evolve in Vietnam, and currently the most pressing autonomization effort is the 
transition to financial self-sufficiency with the reduction and/or elimination of government financial 
support to institutions. The need to gain sustainable financial models will continue to challenge and 
transform the Vietnamese education system for the next decade. 

 

Innovation Ecosystem Development and Coalescence. Vietnam innovation ecosystem is 
emerging but fragmented and disconnected. While most universities have labs, makerspaces, 
incubation centers, entrepreneurship centers, their interconnectedness and connection with the 
private sector and investors, which forms the actual innovation ecosystem, has not yet coalesced. 
Higher education research and development programs are mostly state-driven and often not tied to 
commercialization. Without additional support, it is difficult for universities and other various 
players to successfully build the national innovation capacity and propel entrepreneurs towards 
greater success. 

 

Push for Privatization of Higher Education (HE). In 2005, the HERA also included a provision 
that 40 percent of all HE students should be enrolled in private universities and colleges by 2020. 
Higher Education regulations continue to evolve, with new regulations in 2006 requiring that all 
new private HEIs have to be ‘fully-private’, meaning that they are privately-owned corporate 
entities receiving no financial support from the government (though recently the Government has 
indicated that it might provide some financial assistance for institutions that are established on a 
‘not-for-profit’ basis). However, most private HEIs have a tuition cost of two to three times higher 
than the cost of attending a public HEI. Further, a small number of private HEIs, with reputations 
for international orientation and corporate connections, have become extremely expensive to attend. 
With high tuition costs and only 15 percent private higher education institution (HEI) enrollment, 
private university education will be a limited component of the overall evolving education system 
in Vietnam. Thanks to their previous independence from strong government action, some of these 
universities have been able to experiment and innovate their processes, teaching, and overall 
models. 

 

Evolving Workforce Needs. Vietnamese universities are not producing the educated workforce 
that Vietnam’s economy and society demand. Surveys conducted by government-linked 
associations have found that as many as 50 percent2 of Vietnamese university graduates are unable 
to find jobs in their area of specialization, evidence that the disconnect between classroom and the 
needs of the market is large. Graduated students displayed little to no management, 
communications, leadership, problem-solving or critical thinking skills that are imperative when 
joining a company or creating their own. 

2 https://wenr.wes.org/2017/11/education-in-vietnam 

 

Vietnam’s innovation capacity needs further development. Both the government and the private 
sector see the critical need to strengthen and build a workforce capable of working in a space filled 
with the crucial components of the country’s journey to self-reliance. In addition, workforce 
training needs are changing rapidly, and are in response to the emerging Fourth Industrial 
Revolution (IR 4.0) and overall worldwide conversion to a digital landscape. There is a need to 


improve university curriculum and create ways to ensure the workforce is trained and prepared for 
the new technologies that are currently present and operational in much of Vietnamese reality. 

 

Demand for Curriculum and Pedagogy Reform. To meet the new demands, the manner and 
material that is taught at university must evolve. With recent government controls beginning to be 
relaxed and experimentation starting in this area, pedagogy adaptations such as project based 
learning, non-textbook centric lessons, and flipped classrooms are just beginning to infiltrate the 
classroom. Further, team-based work, experimentation and failure, soft skill development3, and the 
ability for students to be resilient, flexible, and retrainable are also beginning to be recognized as 
vitally important for new graduates. Finally, the unique pressures of IR4.0, and its emergence of 
new areas created when skills, techniques, and knowledge from previously separate fields are 
combined, will also necessitate the reorganization of Vietnamese universities from their 
traditionally siloed structure, to one with a flexible, adaptive structure to allow interdisciplinary and 
cross-sector work. Given the influence of the pending financial autonomization, it is expected that 
many of the smaller and more technically specialized colleges and universities will need to 
combine, reorganize, change, and evolve in order to become independent and sustainable. Through 
reorganization, curriculum change, and pedagogy reform, these faculty may have a unique 
opportunity to better serve their students for the future workforce, research, and other needs of the 
country. 

3 https://www.edu-links.org/resources/social-and-emotional-learning-and-soft-skills 

4 https://universitas21.com/sites/default/files/2019-04/Full%20Report%20and%20Cover.pdf; 
https://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/world-university-rankings/2021 

 

Need for Dynamic University Management. Universities in Vietnam will be evolving rapidly 
over the next few years and will need clear and progressive leadership to help them navigate these 
ever-changing forces. Current public higher education institutions have governing boards, referred 
to as university councils in the case of public universities, that were intended to become responsible 
for setting institutional objectives and strategies, developing guidelines for organizational 
structures, recruiting staff and implementing staff training programs, and approving guidelines for 
the utilization of institutional finances, property, facilities, and equipment. However, since these 
boards were not given the authority to appoint rectors, set tuition fees for full-time degree 
programs, or determine the number of enrolled students, their ability to achieve their lofty aims are 
practically limited. The effect of these barriers will be massive and detrimental to universities as 
they struggle to adapt and survive; as an example, tuition is being capped (and although high to the 
average household, is below market rate), government funding cut and eliminated, and universities 
are being asked to generate revenue. As autonomization changes many of the underlying 
regulations, practices, and constraints of the higher education system, it will be even more 
important for strong leadership, with an eye towards reform, industry needs, growth, and 
innovation, to be supported. 

 

Government’s Push for Global Recognition. Until recently, there were few higher education 
institutions in Vietnam that even approached international standards for governance, curriculum, 
and technology. Vietnam’s university system doesn’t typically register in global rankings, and the 
first appearance that a Vietnamese university makes in the QS Quacquarelli Symonds Annual World 
University Rankings is in the 800-1000 bracket.4As part of the Vietnam 2035 strategic vision, 


within many of the national strategic and messaging documents, and as a fundamental part of a 
journey to self-reliance, Vietnam’s government has committed to reaching international recognition 
as a leader in emerging fields and new technologies. Universities, both as the trainer of a new 
workforce and as the provider of research and development capacity, will need to reach global 
standards for this to happen. One of the provisions under the continued Higher Education Reform 
actions was the recognition that there should be a multi-tiered higher education sector, consisting of 
research, application, and professional-orientated higher education institutions. While these have 
not yet really begun to emerge, there has been increased expenditure on higher education, from 
0.36% GDP in 2001 to 1.0% GDP by 2012. Further, expenditure of science and technology has 
also increased, from 0.87% GDP in 2013 to an expected 2% of GDP in 2020. These percentages 
are broadly comparable with benchmarks for the region, but they are not sufficient to provide public 
universities with the quality of teaching and research infrastructure required to become globally 
competitive. 

 

Economy’s Demand for Increased Research and Development (R&D). Vietnam’s research 
performance is poor by international standards. There is a large gap in academic publishing between 
Vietnam and its two neighboring Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states, 
Thailand and Malaysia. Further, this gap has been widening and is drastically less than South 
Korea’s aspirational example. Vietnam produces a relatively small number of peer-referenced 
international publications per one million population, with 2,418 total articles published in 2013 
compared to Malaysia and Thailand with over 20,000 each in the same year. Of note, 75% of those 
articles in Vietnam were in collaboration with international researchers. Although there has been a 
small uptick in publications recently, Vietnam is still woefully lagging in the generation of cutting-
edge knowledge in the world. Vietnamese universities have not simply shifted their focus to more 
applicable and less theoretical research, with 111 patents awarded in 2017 (compared with 437 for 
Malaysia, 88 for Thailand, and over 90,847 for South Korea), Vietnam is also lagging far behind in 
the type of research that could generate new products and technologies and continue to grow its 
economy. Further, the research capability is weakened at Vietnamese universities since there is such 
little time available due to high student teaching loads and access to very limited funding. With just 
2% of the funds for public universities earmarked for use to support research, and the government 
unable to meet this goal, there is simply not enough dedicated and consistent funding available to 
sustain the types of cutting-edge research efforts that lead to high impact publications and patents. 
What research is done, is conducted in specialized research institutes that are not yet closely linked 
with teaching, even when these institutes are part of the university. 

 

If Vietnam aspires to have a more globally recognized, workforce-ready, research-oriented higher 
education sector, it will need to intensify its pace towards reform, create stronger connections to 
current and emerging workforce needs, deepen its innovation ecosystem, create strong and 
progressive university leadership, and increase its overall investment. The government, through its 
own descriptions of its development and journey to self-reliance, has adopted a spate of higher 
education reform laws and agendas, and speaks regularly about the need and importance to 
transform the system. While the country may not reach many of its ambitious aims, the current 
agendas reflect the value and drive of Vietnam in this sector, and as the country has shown in the 
past, they always strive to pursue and achieve seemingly far-reaching dreams. 

 

USAID Investments in Strengthening Vietnam’s Higher Education System 


 

USAID/Vietnam has supported a wide range of higher education partnership programs. The Higher 
Engineering Education Alliance Program (HEEAP) aimed to transform Vietnam’s engineering 
pedagogy from “passive, theory-based to active, project-based instruction” to produce “work-
ready” graduates, the Vocational and University Leadership Innovation Institute (VULII, or HEEAP 
2.0) aimed to build institutional leadership commitment and capacity for achieving higher standards 
in Vietnamese universities and technical colleges, and Building University-Industry Learning and 
Development through Innovation and Technology (BUILD-IT) focuses on mainstream curriculum, 
quality assurance, and university facilities to fully align supported institutions with. In leveraging 
diverse government, industry, and academic partners partnership, these programs transformed 
engineering education in Vietnam, improved job readiness, having built the institutions and models 
of industry-academic collaboration to produce a technology workforce with the technical and soft 
skills required by industry to enable success in technology-intensive global manufacturing as 
Vietnam’s high-tech industry continues to grow. 

 

The Improving Access, Curriculum and Teaching in Medical Education and Emerging Diseases 
(IMPACT-MED) Alliance have built successful models of engaging the GVN, universities, and 
businesses in overhauling the curriculum and setting standards for competency-based medical 
education. USAID has also supported the first independent, non-profit university in Vietnam, 
Fulbright University, to develop and deepen its capacity to deliver and sustain high quality 
undergraduate and graduate education programs. 

 

In line with the recently released USAID Higher Education Program Framework, USAID/Vietnam, 
through past and future higher education programming seeks to leverage expertise and interventions 
that address the following components of higher education system and institutional reform: 
platform for Government-Industry-Higher Education collaboration, intensive management coaching 
to university leaders, curriculum and pedagogy innovations to shift the focus to learners, faculty 
increase capacity to develop innovative curriculum and design new pedagogical approaches to 
teaching, and impart the value of continuous improvement, deploy learning technology, 
autonomous vision, student centeredness, and global standards recognition. 

 

This new Partnership for Higher Education Reform is intended to build on effective models, 
introduce innovative approaches, and develop new partnerships to assist the Vietnam National 
University- Hanoi (VNU-HN), Vietnam National University - Ho Chi Minh (VNU-HCM), and the 
University of Danang to become more independent, sustainable, and high quality higher education 
institutions. 

 

These three universities in the VNU system are structured as umbrella universities with several 
member institutions representing a wide range of academic disciplines. These institutions have a 
huge potential for the development of the kind of multidisciplinary research and training programs 
that are needed to address national, regional, and global challenges in innovation and in skills 
requirements. However, significant challenges remain for these national universities to accelerate, 
scale, and sustain reforms across the VNU system including the need to: 

 

1. Develop more autonomous, effective, transparent governance and financing; 
2. Modernize curriculum content and improve teaching practices; 



3. Develop university research capacity and strategic partnerships and; 
4. Transition from a siloed to a more integrated university model. 


 

The GVN and the World Bank has inked a loan project5 of $355 million to improve teaching and 
research capacity at Vietnam National University-Hanoi, Vietnam National University-Ho Chi 
Minh City and the University of Danang. Through investments in modern infrastructure, cutting-
edge equipment and knowledge transfer, the Vietnam National University Development project 
(VNUDP) will help accelerate the transformation of VNU-Hanoi, VNU-HCM, and UD into 
regionally competitive institutions with advanced teaching and research capabilities. This 
Partnership for Higher Education Reform activity will coordinate closely with the VNUDP in 
designing the technical assistance program to accelerate the GVN’s development goals for those 
universities. 

5 World Bank - Vietnam National University Project 

 

A.2 ACTIVITY OBJECTIVES & THEORY OF CHANGE 


 

The Partnership for Higher Education Reform activity aims to modernize the selected universities 
to support their desire to become world-class institutions. 

 

The activity theory of change (ToC) articulates what a modern higher education institution is and 
focuses USAID’s funding on three core areas: sustainability / autonomy, academic quality, and 
research and innovation. The three areas are interlinked. For example, a higher education institution 
that has effective governance would have quality assurance mechanisms in place that ensure higher 
quality academics. Higher quality academics will contribute to increased financial sustainability. 
Research and academics also support each other - stronger research capacity improves academic 
offerings and both can contribute to increased revenue for the institution. 

 



This activity will have three mutually reinforcing objectives: 

 

1. More sustainable and autonomous VNUs. This component should support the selected 
universities to develop and implement plans to become more autonomous, accountable, and 
financially self-sufficient. Plans should include but are not limited to: governance structures 
and practices, strategies to diversify income sources, establishing appropriate tuition and 
fees, developing sustainable merit and need based scholarships, and promoting financial 
incentives to attract and retain high caliber faculty. 
2. Improved academic quality. This component should support the development and 
implementation of integrated courses and academic programs; identify, develop, and 
implement appropriate and affordable technology platforms; and improve curriculum and 
pedagogy through universal design for learning6. 


6 Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a set of principles for curriculum development that give all individuals equal 
opportunities to learn. Learn more at http://udloncampus.cast.org/home. 

 

3. Improved research and innovation capacity. The component should support the 
development and implementation of comprehensive university plans to improve faculty and 
student research and innovation which may include strategic partnerships with U.S. higher 
education institutions. This component should also explore and support opportunities for the 
VNUs to generate and apply research to address local and national development challenges. 


 

For these objectives to be achieved, the Applicant, in collaboration with VNUs, must engage the 
private sector and facilitate effective collaboration among multiple stakeholders. 

 

A.3 Guiding principles 


 

A.3.1. Partnerships 






 

As the Activity name implies, a core principle is to seek, identify, develop and support partnerships 
to achieve the program objectives. USAID/Vietnam encourages applicants to strategically engage 
with a wide range of partners from the public and private sectors who can support, advance, expand 
or accelerate the program. 

 

A.3.2. Gender 






 

Gender equality is essential for achieving USAID’s development goals. It is requested that the 
Applicant proposes innovative ways and takes efforts to address the following gender gaps/issues 
identified in the higher education universities: 

● Promoting female senior leadership 
● Addressing gender-based violence (at workplace, on campus) 


 The Recipient may also assist the universities in an integrated manner in: 

● Developing and implementing inclusion and diversity plans and strategies 
● Revising curriculum and pedagogical approaches integrate best practices in gender-
inclusive teaching methods and ethical standards. 



● Encouraging/mentoring more female students to pursue academic, research and 
private sector careers. 


 

A.3.3. Capacity Development: 






 

The Recipient is expected to have an intentional approach to local capacity development of actors 
engaged in collective impact initiatives. As defined under USAID’s forthcoming Local Capacity 
Development Policy7, USAID/Vietnam defines local capacity development as: “improving the 
performance of local systems and stakeholders—including civil society, government, the private 
sector, academia, and more—to achieve results.” The Recipient’s capacity building approach 
should: 

7 Local Capacity Development Policy Overview, USAID. https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/local_capacity_development_policy_one-
pager_final.pdf 

 

● Recognize that there is always a system and there are capacities at many levels within the 
system 
● Develop diverse capacities by responding to local priorities and leveraging local 
strengths/assets 
● Be mindful of, and mitigate, the unintended consequences of our engagement 
● Nurture local ownership of capacity development through partnerships based on mutuality 
● Measure performance and monitor for improvement over time 
● Be in service of the activity purpose of modernizing VNUs 


 

An intentional approach to capacity building entails: 

 

● Allocating resources (human, financial, and/or other) for capacity development 
● Ensuring capacity development is demand-driven and responsive to the needs of local actors 
to achieve results 
● Identifying capacity strengths and gaps to inform capacity development support 
● Identifying performance improvement and capacity development solutions (beyond training) 
that address needs 
● Monitoring progress on capacity improvements 


 

USAID/Vietnam encourages the Recipient to implement innovative approaches to capacity 
development that are evidence-based. 

 

A.3.4. Sustainability 






 

The activity will ensure sustainability by integrating the following approaches: 

a) Stakeholders’ ownership of the interventions. 
b) Mechanisms for continuous involvement of the selected universities, relevant 
government agencies, and industry partners in designing, planning, implementing, 
monitoring and evaluating the activity should be in place throughout the 
performance period. 





c) Institutional policies are effective to endorse the implementation of innovative 
reforms. 
d) Institution human resources have increased the necessary capacity to implement the 
reforms. 
e) Lessons learned and successes of activity interventions are documented and fed into 
the national reform agenda. 




 

A.3.5. Private Sector Engagement 






 

The USAID’s Private Sector Engagement Policy outlines the value of aligning the interests of 
the private sector, the host government, and the donor community. Stronger university-industry 
linkages in teaching and research quality improvement will be the key performance indicators for 
the assistance program. The Recipient will clearly identify potential industry partners, define 
approaches and measurable outcomes for proposed activities. 

 

USAID is committed to increasing the sustainable impact of our development assistance 
programs through strategic partnerships with the private sector. Recipients will reach out to the 
private sector and explore ways in which collaboration with USAID might help each partner to 
more effectively solve key problems, advance our respective interests, and achieve far greater 
development results and impacts. In an effort to facilitate substantial alliance investments and 
market-informed approaches, broaden the level of partner engagement, and help enhance the 
prospects of sustainable, wide scale impact, the prospective implementing partner should 
mobilize private sector expertise, contributions and resources at least at 50% of the federal 
funding. 

 

A.3.6. Shock-Responsiveness 






 

At the time of the release of this RFA, COVID-19 is having impacts on education and 
economies globally. Although Vietnam has achieved significant results in containing the 
COVID-19 pandemic, its impacts continue to expand and it is likely that COVID-19 will not be 
the only emergent shock or change in context during the life of this award. The Recipient will 
specify strategic approaches that consider the new normal conditions in planning, design, and 
management of assistance activities. The Recipient is encouraged to look beyond challenges for 
potential opportunities as the universities adopt modern governance structure and education 
innovations. The Shock Responsive Programming and Adaptive Mechanisms guide can help 
inform how to develop an activity that can be responsive to a context subject to emergent or 
recurrent crises or conflict. 

 

A.4 Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting 


 

The Recipient will adopt an activity approach that contributes to the USAID/Vietnam’s 
commitment to a multifaceted Collaborating, Learning & Adapting8 (CLA) approach to 
development. The CLA approach is based on the understanding that development efforts yield more 
effective results if they are coordinated and collaborative; test promising, new approaches in a 

8 https://usaidlearninglab.org/cla-toolkit 


72044021RFA00003USAID Partnership for Higher Education Reform

continuous yet also rapid, targeted search for generating improvements and efficiencies; and build 
on what works and eliminate what doesn’t. TheRecipient willdevelop an activity-wide learning 
agenda that outlines howit will embed learning throughout implementation. The agenda willinclude specifics on howthe learning will cascadedown to partnersand be integrated in 
interactions with stakeholders. The activity learning agenda should also support, whereapplicable,
USAID’s Agency-wide higher education learning agenda.

A sufficient and reasonable portion of the budgetshould be allocated for collaboration, learning, 
and adaptive management. That includes allocating funds for CLA relatedactivities orprocesses,
such as convening partners, facilitating knowledge captureand sharing, or investment in 
organizational development and adaptive management skills.

This activity is rooted in supporting partnerships between theVNUs. Underlying theserelationships, the collaboration, learning, and adapting components should speak directly to theactivity purpose and objectives. The commitment to CLA is expected not just during 
implementation, but as part of the overall design and administration of this activity.

Collaborating

●Lead by example with key partners to develop and maintain relationships with key 
stakeholders. In theearly stages use techniques like snowballing to identify key stakeholdersacross thegovernment, community, and education spectrum. Ensure both students and theprivate sectorare included in stakeholder engagement.
●Support co-creation of work plans and key deliverables with key stakeholders including, butnot limited to, activity partners, government, and students.
Learning

●Ensuring monitoring approaches support continuous learning and adaptivemanagement. 
This may include:
○Having an intentional approach to stakeholder feedback to inform adaptations during 
implementation.
○Conduct regularafter-actionreviews both internally and with key stakeholders. 
○Integrating qualitative approaches to monitoring.
●Build a community of practice between VNUs and with relevant stakeholders to documentand share innovations in academic programming and teaching practices.
●Develop a knowledge management system that is accessible to key stakeholders.
Adapting

●Pause and Reflect sessions should be integrated throughout implementation, particularly 
beforework planning to ensure learning is used to inform future work.
●The Recipient is encouraged to share its learning and adaptations with USAID to informUSAID’s highereducation portfolio.
●USAID will provide flexibility to the implementer to adapt when learning indicatesadjustments are necessary.
Enabling Conditions


• The Applicant is expected to foster an organizational culture that supports an open 
exchange of ideas internally and externally. This should include supporting regular formal 
and informal reviews of activities, learning priorities, and providing opportunities for staff 
and stakeholders to provide feedback. 


 

A.5 Performance Monitoring and Evaluation 


 

The Recipient will be required to track the following indicators: 

 

● CBLD-9: Percent of USG assisted organizations with improved performance 
● CBLD-10: Value ($) of non-donor resources mobilized for local development priorities 
● Number of higher education academic programs or institutions for which an international 
regional, or national accreditation process is initiated or achieved 


 

Other applicable indicators may include: 

 

● ES 2.1: Number of host country higher education institutions receiving capacity 
development support with USG assistance 
● ES 2-52: Number of individuals affiliated with higher education institutions receiving 
capacity development support with USG assistance 
● GNDR-8/WGP 3.3: Number of persons trained with USG assistance to advance outcomes 
consistent with gender equality or female empowerment through their roles in public or 
private sector institutions or organizations 
● STIR-12: Number of peer-reviewed scientific publications resulting from USG support to 
research and implementation programs 
● STIR-10: Number of innovations supported through USG assistance 


 

Additional indicators should be incorporated, as applicable, into the Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP) based on proposed interventions. The USAID Education 
Reporting Toolkit may be a relevant resource for developing an AMELP. 

 

The Recipient will employ qualitative approaches to monitoring. It may be asked to participate in 
the mission-wide most significant change qualitative analysis. The Recipient’s MEL team is 
expected to coordinate with the technical team on learning events and work in concert to develop 
learning and adaptation recommendations based on data collected as part of the monitoring 
component. 

 

As part of its monitoring effort, the Recipient is expected to apply an intentional approach to 
context monitoring, which involves monitoring key assumptions and risks to the activity’s theory of 
change. 

 

The Recipient may be requested to participate in an activity-level midterm or final performance 
evaluation conducted by a third-party; this is to be determined. 

 

 [END OF SECTION A] 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1 ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 


 

Subject to funding availability, USAID intends to provide up to $14,200,000 in total USAID 
funding. 

 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this NOFO. USAID reserves 
the right to fund any one or none of the applications submitted. 

 

B.2 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 


 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five years, starting from [actual date to be filled in at 
the time of award]. 

 

B.3 SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 


 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID/Vietnam anticipates a close working partnership with the 
successful Applicant for this activity to assist in achieving the objectives. The specific areas of 
USAID involvement will include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Approval of the Recipient’s Annual Implementation Plans by the designated Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR); 


 

2. Approval of specified Key Personnel: Key Personnel positions will be identified and stated in 
the award. The Recipient shall request prior approval from the USAID Agreement Officer 
(AO) for the replacement of key personnel or changes in the key personnel positions; 


 

3. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation: The Recipient must request prior 
written concurrence from the AOR and obtain approval from the AO before entering into any 
sub-awards under the performance of this agreement; and 


 

4. Approval of the Recipient’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan by the AOR. 


 

B.4 AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 


 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937. 

 

B.5 NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the USAID Partnership 
for Higher Education Reform which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will 
be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The 


Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with 
underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 

 

Organizations eligible to apply under this NOFO includes non-profit or for-profit non-governmental 
organizations, inclusive of, foundations, colleges and universities, private businesses and 
associations and excludes public international organizations and governmental organizations. 

 

While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 
award profit to prime recipients and subrecipients under assistance instruments. However, while 
profit is not allowed for sub-awards, the prohibition does not apply when the recipient acquires 
goods and services in accordance with 2 CFR 200.317 -326, “Procurement Standards.” Forgone 
profit does not qualify as cost-share. 

 

Each applicant must be found to be a responsible entity before receiving an award. The Agreement 
Officer (AO) may determine that a pre-award survey is required in accordance with ADS 303.3.9.1 
to determine whether the applicant has the necessary organization, experience, accounting and 
operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with established U.S. Government standards, laws, and 
regulations. Applicants who do not currently meet all USAID requirements for systems and controls 
may still be eligible under special award considerations and should not be discouraged from 
applying. USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received 
financial assistance from USAID. The prime recipient is encouraged to promote involvement of 
“underutilized” partners and local organizations in the implementation of this activity. 

 

C.2 COST SHARING OR MATCHING 

 

USAID has established a minimum required cost share of 10% of the total estimated cost for this 

activity, which is approximately US$ [exact amount to be inserted by the time of award] to be 
contributed throughout the life of the activity. Such funds may be mobilized from the recipient; 
other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors; host governments; and local organizations, 
communities and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of 
activities at the country level, but not from other USG funding sources. This may include 
contribution of staff level of effort, office space or other facilities or equipment which may be used 
for the activity, provided by the partner. For guidance on cost sharing in grants and cooperative 
agreements, please see the ADS 303.3.10 and 2 CFR 200.306 for U.S. NGOs. For non-US NGOs, 
all cost sharing would be subject to the Required as Applicable Provision “Cost Sharing” in the 
Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 303, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental 
Organizations. 

 

C.3 ELIGIBILITY OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR USAID FINANCING 

 

• Applicable Rules 


 

The recipient must comply with USAID’s Rules for Procurement of Commodities and Services 
Financed by USAID in 22 CFR 228 in the procurement and long-term lease (as defined in 22 CFR 


228.01) of goods and services with USAID funds. These rules govern the source of USAID-
financed commodities and the nationality of suppliers of USAID-financed commodities and 
services, which must be in a country that is included in the authorized geographic code. These rules 
apply to the recipient’s procurement contracts (as defined in 2 CFR 200) with vendors and to 
subcontracts at all tiers under the recipient’s procurement contracts. 

 

• Sub-Awards 


 

These rules do not apply to sub-awards (as defined in 2 CFR 200.92), but do apply to the 
procurement and long-term lease of goods and services by sub-recipients (as defined in 2 CFR 
200.93) at all tiers, and to those sub-recipients’ procurement contracts and subcontracts with 
vendors at all tiers. These rules do not apply to procurement or long-term lease of goods and 
services with cost-sharing or program income funds. 

 

• Restricted Commodities 


 

“Restricted Commodities” are certain agricultural commodities, motor vehicles (excluding driver 
service), pharmaceuticals, condoms and contraceptives, pesticides, used equipment, and non-local 
purchase of fertilizer. Special rules apply to restricted commodities, and are described in ADS 
312.3.3. 

 

C.4 ELIGIBILITY OF ACTIVITIES UNDER USAID’S ENVIRONMENTAL 
REGULATIONS 

 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental sustainability as 
a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate is 
codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200), which, in part, require 
that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 
Recipient environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are 
specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under this Cooperative Agreement will be implemented unless an environmental 
threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as 
documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination 
(IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer 
(BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation.”). 

 


An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) has been approved for the Higher Education project, 
which covers activities expected to be implemented under this agreement, which justify Categorial 
Exclusions pursuant to 22CFR216.2(c)(1) and (2), for which an Initial Environmental Examination, 
or an Environmental Assessment are not required because the actions do not have an effect on the 
natural or physical environment. These activities fall into the following categories: 

 

• Education, technical assistance, or training programs (216.2(c)(2)(i)) 
• Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings (216.2(c)(2)(iii)) 
• Document and information transfers (216.2(c)(2)(v)). 


 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in collaboration 
with the USAID Cognizant Technical Officer and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau 
Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities under this 
Cooperative Agreement to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation. 

 

If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 

 

C.5 LIMITATIONS ON SUBMISSIONS 

 

Each applicant is limited to one application submission under this NOFO as the prime Applicant. 
There is no limitation on being included as a potential sub-awardee across multiple applications. The 
use of exclusive teaming arrangements is discouraged. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1 AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT 


 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr. Bruce Gelband 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Vietnam 

15/F Tung Shing Square, 2 Ngo Quyen 

Hanoi, Vietnam 

Email: bgelband@usaid.gov 

 

The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Huyen Dang 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Vietnam 

15/F Tung Shing Square, 2 Ngo Quyen 

Hanoi, Vietnam 

Email: hdang@usaid.gov 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and any 
subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All applications must be submitted 
according to instructions contained in this NOFO. 

 

In order to maintain a fair and transparent funding opportunity, USAID maintains strict guidelines 
on who within USAID may be contacted regarding applications or questions about the opportunity. 
Applicants may only contact USAID via the email address provided in this NOFO. Failure to 
comply with the USAID points of contact guidance mandated in the NOFO may disqualify the 
Applicant(s). 

 

D.2 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


 

Questions and requests for clarification regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to the 
Agency Points of Contact above no later than the date and time indicated on the cover page. 

 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on www.grants.gov, if 
that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to 
any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov for any amendments. 

 

D.3 SUBMISSION DATE AND TIME 


 


Applications must be submitted by email to points of contact stated in Section D.1 before the 
respective due dates and times on the cover page. Applicants must ensure that the applications are 
received at USAID/Vietnam in their entirety. No additions or modifications to submitted 
applications will be accepted after the closing date and time. Late applications will be considered 
only if the Agreement Officer determines it is in the Government’s interest. Each email submission 
may not exceed 15 MB in size. 

 

Hard copies, whether hand delivered or by postal mail, will not be accepted. 

 

If you do not receive an email confirmation for receipt of applications, please contact the point of 
contact at the email address noted above. 

 

D.4 APPLICANTS RESPONSIVENESS 


 

All applications received by the closing date and time will be reviewed for responsiveness to the 
specifications outlined in these guidelines and the application format. Section E: Application 
Review Information addresses technical evaluation application criteria. Applicants must review, 
understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may lead to the 
disqualification of an application. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary 
documentation is complete and received on time. 

 

D.5 APPLICATION PROCESS 


 

a. Summary Applications: USAID/Vietnam requests the submittal of Summary Applications (See 
D.6 below). The highest rated application will be invited to participate in the process described 
hereunder. 










 

b. Joint Program Description Development: 










 

USAID/Vietnam will engage in a co-creation process with the most highly rated Applicant and 
other stakeholders within and outside of USAID. The co-creation process is an integral part of 
this process to develop the most effective, holistic approach to achieve program objectives. 
USAID expects the co-creation to be a participatory approach with an emphasis on a shared 
vision, responsibility, decision-making and ownership over the ultimate program. It will involve 
collaborating with resource partners, potential implementing partners, end users and other 
stakeholders toward a range of outcomes, such as a richer understanding of the problem, a 
shared strategy for action, ideas or specific solutions, or lessons and insights as well as to ensure 
a results-orientated activity. During the co-creation participants will design approaches to 
achieve a high degree of measurable, sustainable impact. Through co-creation, USAID goes 
beyond knowledge sharing or learning from various stakeholders and moves toward interactive 
and ongoing engagement with those who are affected by or hold influence over an issue. 

 

Only the apparently successful Applicant will be invited to the co-creation. The competitive 
portion of the process is concluded at this point and USAID and the Applicant may freely 
exchange information and collaborate to finalize the program description and award 
documentation. USAID expects that the co-creation process may include a (virtual or in-person) 


workshop, stakeholder engagements and consultations, and other meetings and consultations, as 
necessary. USAID discourages exclusivity agreements between partners at this stage. USAID 
wishes to maintain a high level of flexibility in terms of creating a coalition of partners due to 
potential changes in the Applicant’s approach as a result of co-creation. Consequently, only the 
prime Applicant will be engaged in the initial consultations. These consultations will inform the 
following stages where any modifications in the teaming can be proposed by the Applicant as a 
result of the collaborative work with USAID and potential stakeholders. 

 

Any expenses incurred by Applicants during this time are solely the responsibility of the 
Applicants. If at any point during the course of the co-creation process, the Agreement Officer 
determines that the apparently successful Applicant is unable to provide satisfactory Technical 
and Business Applications, or did not meet deadlines for submissions, or the Applicant and 
USAID cannot come to agreement on the terms and conditions of the final award, then the 
Agreement Officer may designate the next highest-evaluated Applicant from the Summary 
Application stage as the apparently successful Applicant. 

 

The duration of this process is expected to be approximately two (2) weeks. Thereafter, the 
selected Applicant(s) will have additional time (approx. two (2) additional weeks) to prepare a 
final technical and cost application (the Full Application) for USAID consideration. See more 
specific dates below in ATTACHMENT E: PLANNED PRE-AWARD SCHEDULE. 

Further details on the co-development process will be shared with the apparently successful 
Applicant. USAID reserves the right to invite more than one Applicant, if deemed appropriate, 
or to not conduct a co-development meeting. 

c. Full Application Submission 










 

USAID will accept a Full Application by invitation ONLY. The Full Application will expand 
upon the Summary Application to provide details about the planned activities and results to be 
achieved, incorporating ideas, adjustments, feedback, etc. that arose during co-creation. 
Additional information regarding the Full Application will be provided at the time of its request, 
including additional guidance for a detailed budget submission, if any. A request for Full 
Application via a Request for Application (RFA) should not be interpreted as a commitment to 
funding or guaranteed issuance of an award. If a Full Application is successful and an award is 
issued, the Agreement Officer (AO) will appoint an Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
at that time. 

 

D.6 SUMMARY APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 


 

Submission of Summary Applications 

 

a. The subject line of application submissions must reference the NOFO No. 72044021RFA00003 
and the title of the activity: USAID Partnership for Higher Education Reform. The applicant 
must indicate in the subject line of the email if multiple emails are sent (e.g. “1 of 2”). 


 

b. Applications in response to this NOFO must be in English, and in U.S. dollars. 



Restriction on Disclosure and Use of Data 

 

a. Applicants that include in their applications data that they do not want disclosed to the public 
for any purpose, or used by the Government except for evaluation purposes shall: 

 

i. Mark the title page with the following legend: “This application includes data that shall 
not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed - 
in whole or in part - for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, 
a grant or cooperative agreement is awarded to this Applicant as a result of - or in 
connection with - the submission of this data, the Government shall have the right to 
duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data 
if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets [insert numbers or other identification of sheets]”; and 


 

ii. Mark each page containing restricted data with the following legend: “Use or disclosure 
of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 


 

b. Applicants are advised that it is anticipated that the successful program narrative, submitted as 
part of the technical application, will become the Program Description of the cooperative 
agreement awarded as a result of this NOFO. Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act of 
1981, the public is entitled to request information from Agency award files. As a general rule, 
information will be disclosed except: 

 

i. Information submitted in response to this NOFO, prior to award of the grant, or 
modifications or revisions thereto. 
ii. Information properly classified or administratively controlled by USAID. 
iii. Information specifically exempted from disclosure under the Freedom of Information 
Act. 


 

c. Upon award of the cooperative agreement resulting from this NOFO, USAID will disclose, use, 
or duplicate any information submitted in response to this NOFO to the extent provided in the 
award, and as required by the Freedom of Information Act. 

 

Pre-Award Audits/Surveys and Discussions 

 

USAID reserves the right to perform a pre-award audit/survey which may include, but is not limited 
to: (1) interviews with individuals to establish their ability to perform award duties under project 
conditions; (2) a review of the Applicant's financial condition, business and personnel policies and 
procedures, etc.; and (3) site visits to the Applicant's institution. However, it must be understood 
that USAID undertakes no obligation to perform any of the foregoing elements. Accordingly, 
Applicants should submit their best and most complete application initially. 

 

Authority to Commit USAID 


The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit USAID to the expenditure 
of public funds. No costs allocable to the proposed award will be reimbursed by USAID before 
receipt of either a fully executed grant or cooperative agreement, or a specific written authorization 
from the Agreement Officer. 

 

D.7 SUMMARY TECHNICAL APPLICATION 


 

(a) General 


 

Applicants must organize the application to follow the technical evaluation criteria specified in 
Section E. The page length for the application shall not exceed seventeen (17) pages. Within 
these pages, the executive summary shall not exceed one (1) page. The only annexes to be 
evaluated are listed hereunder and are not subject to the page limitation. 

 

Technical application must be organized in the following manner: 

 

I. Executive Summary – not to exceed one (01) page 
II. Technical Solution 
IV. Institutional Experience 
V. Key personnel and Staffing Plan 
V. Annexes - See below 


 

Annex A: Theory of Change Diagram 

Annex B: Staffing Pattern/ Organizational Chart, including title and position description of 
proposed key personnel positions. 

Annex C: Resume and Letter of Commitment of the Chief of Party 

Annex D: History of Performance 

 

(b) Limitations 


 

USAID will not evaluate information submitted in excess of the above stated page limits. The 
Technical Application shall be written in Time New Roman Font, 12-point size. The 12-point size 
requirement does not apply to text boxes, footnotes, tables, graphs and charts, though these should 
be used sparingly and not in place of basic text. Applicants shall use only 8.5 inch by 11-inch 
(210mm by 297mm) paper, with margins no less than one inch on each border. Number each page 
consecutively. 

 

Note: A page in the Technical Application that contains a table, chart, graph, etc., not otherwise 
explicitly excluded per the instruction, is subject to the page limitation. 

 

Not included in this page limitation are the following: 

 

• Cover Page – the Applicant must provide with the following information on the Cover Page: 


 

a. Name of the organization submitting the application; 





b. Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
c. Activity Title; 
d. Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 
e. Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303.6). 
f. DUNS number 




 

• Table of Contents 
• Acronym List 
• Annexes (as specified in D.7(a) above) 


 

Information from annexes should be summarized in the narrative of the Technical Application, 
as appropriate for the context of the narrative. 

 

(c) Content of the Technical Application 

 

Technical applications should include the sections and content below and should be directed at the 
program as described in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description. The technical application will 
be the critical item of consideration in selection of an Applicant for an award. The information 
provided in the technical application must be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The 
technical application must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the goals of this program and specify the specific results to be achieved. The merit review 
criteria set forth in Section E. Application Review Information of this NOFO indicate the relative 
importance of each criterion so that Applicants will know which areas require emphasis in the 
preparation of the technical application. Applicants are advised that lack of completeness or 
superficiality of the application may constitute grounds for excluding it from consideration. 

 

The Technical Application includes the information set forth below: 

 

1. Executive Summary (maximum 01 pages) 


 

A succinct summary of the Applicant’s overall implementation approach. 

 

2. Technical Solution [See Section E.2] 


 

The Technical Solution should convincingly articulate the Applicant’s proposed activities to 
accomplish the objectives presented in the Funding Opportunity Description, focusing on what is 
technically and politically feasible within the five years of the Program. The Applicant should not 
merely repeat what is already described in the Program Description but should convincingly 
describe how the Applicant proposes to achieve the Activity Objectives (A.2), detailing the results 
to be achieved and methodology employed. The Applicant should demonstrate why the approach 
proposed is the most effective means to realize the Activity Objectives and how the Guiding 


Principles, including gender and social inclusion, will be leveraged to achieve sustainable results. 
The Applicant should describe how they will identify possible interventions, structure their 
management to achieve the Activity Objectives, and embody guiding principles in their work. 

 

The Applicant must include an initial theory of change to illustrate its understanding of the higher 
education context in Vietnam and possible entry points for change. The theory of change should 
detail assumptions, underlying logic, and knowledge gaps that need further exploration during start-
up. Applicants are also strongly encouraged to offer innovative ideas about how to achieve the 
objectives of the activity that demonstrate a solid understanding of Vietnam’s higher education 
context and identify entry points that USAID may have overlooked in this solicitation. Applicants 
should use this as an opportunity to identify any less-developed assumptions or unrealistic 
expectations on the part of USAID in the NOFO and provide concrete alternatives or adjustments 
as necessary. 

 

The Applicant should describe their proposed approach to identify and establish co-funding, 
market-based, and strategic partnership opportunities with private sector actors that may enhance 
development results and impacts under this award. The Applicant should describe their intended 
approach to leverage financial and in-kind resources from outside partners that would further the 
impact of the Partnership for Higher Education Reform activity and promote long-term 
sustainability following the end of USAID funding. 

 

3. Institutional Experience [See Section E.2] 


 

The prime Applicant must demonstrate experience in governance and management reform for 
higher education institutions, see (i) below. The prime Applicant and/ or its major subgrantee(s)*, 
if any, combined must demonstrate experience in technology application in education and 
management, see (ii) below In providing examples of experience as outlined in (i) and (ii) below, 
the Applicant must precisely describe its (or major subgrantees’) specific role(s) in implementing 
the experiences described and the development impact of the intervention. Also, the Applicant 
must articulate how the described institutional experience will enhance the likelihood of 
successful implementation of this activity and the applicant’s unique technical solution. 

 

* For the purpose of this section, the term “major subgrantee” includes only those subgrantee(s) 
budgeted in excess of $2.5 million in the cost proposal over the entirety of the performance period 
as reflected in the Cost Application. 

 

i. Prime applicant experience implementing governance and management reform for 
higher education institutions in Asia or developing countries during the last four years. 
At minimum, the applicant should include experience directly related to: 

 

• Higher education governance structures and operational effectiveness and efficiency. 
• Multi-stakeholder facilitation and alignment towards institutional governance reform. 
• Organizational analysis of a higher education institution to assist in identifying strengths 
and weaknesses of institutional quality assurance systems. 
• Assessing tangible outcomes to measure the institutional performance and accountability. 



• Identifying capacity development needs and providing tailored capacity development 
support 
• Ensuring the sustainability through mobilizing external financing, leveraging financial and 
in-kind resources from outside partners, and gaining the long-term commitment of private 
sector actors 


 

ii. Prime applicant and major subawardee(s), if any, experience providing technical or 
advisory services on education technology. At minimum, the applicant should include 
experience directly related to: 

 

• Identifying suitable framework and solutions on education technology application. 
• Enhancing human resource capacity and data system to enable digitalization for learning, 
teaching, and management. 
• Facilitating mutually-beneficial, long-term partnerships with businesses/investors in 
education technology implementation and identifying co-funding opportunities 


 

4. Key Personnel and Staffing Plan [See Section E.2] 


 

a. Key Personnel: 


 

USAID/Vietnam determined that three (3) personnel positions are key for this award, 
including the Chief of Party. For this RFA, the Applicant need only identify by name the 
proposed Chief of Party. No other individual should be identified nor will be evaluated, but the 
positions will be included in the overall staffing plan as described below. The Recipient's key 
personnel should have experience with the core roles of the Recipient in previous programs. 
Staff must be politically savvy, adaptable and flexible, and able to create a supportive, 
adaptive learning-oriented culture. 

 

USAID expects relevant staff to have the appropriate qualifications and experience to work as a 
team to manage a complex U.S. Government Program, especially the ability to bring in regional and 
international best practices in the higher education sector. 

 

The COP should have at least 10 years of relevant working experience in the higher education 
sector, of which at least 5 years of experience in areas related to institutional capacity development 
and/or private sector (*) engagement, preferably both, also half of which should be in Asia or 
developing countries. In addition to technical experience, the COP should have political savvy, 
excellent organizational and management skills, proven leadership abilities within a multi-partner 
initiative, and experience representing projects at high levels of policy engagement. 

 

(*) For the purposes of this NOFO, private sector partners include all entities who are 
relevant to higher education institutions and education development. They may be local, 
international business, investors, banks, business associations, chamber of commerce, 
business incubators, and accelerators. Effective collaboration between higher education 
institutions and the private sector partners often ensures that the graduates and research they 
produce meet private sector needs. 

 


The following skills and expertise should be largely found, collectively, within the Key 
Personnel: 

 

• Experience and expertise in facilitating multi-stakeholder collaboration 
• Experience in higher education institutional governance and/or quality assurance systems. 
• Knowledge of and experience with the public university management system in Vietnam. 
• Experience implementing education technology and digitalization. 
• Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) expertise with a strong focus on adaptive 
management 
• Experience fostering private sector partnerships and securing independent financing for 
higher education reform 
• Gender integration and social inclusion expertise 


 

b. Staffing Plan: 


 

Applicants must propose a staffing plan that convincingly demonstrates the Applicant’s 
ability to successfully implement the Activity. The Applicant must describe how the 
proposed Staffing Plan (including proposed COP) will ensure successful 
implementation and the approach by which local Vietnamese labor and expertise will be 
maximized. If more than one full-time expatriate is proposed, the Applicant must justify 
using more than one expatriate, as opposed to local Vietnamese professions. 

 

The Applicant must describe the division of roles and responsibilities between the 
applicant, subawardees and other resource organizations, if any, in implementing the 
activity. The Applicant shall describe staffing roles for any proposed sub-awardees with 
defined lines of management, supervisory authority, and technical responsibility. The 
staffing plan shall clearly and logically address how consultants will be used to complement 
full-time project staff and whether they will be local or expatriate staff. 

 

The Applicant must describe the proposed partnership and how the core partner(s) and/or 
subwardee(s), including institutional strengths, capabilities, resources leveraged, alignment 
with individual or institutional priorities and mandates, and other appropriate context. The 
Applicant shall indicate institutional commitment and roles to the proposed activities and 
their intended outcomes and describe how the proposed approach to partnership specifically 
fits the development problem(s) or challenge(s) to be addressed. 

 

Given that substantial collaboration is anticipated between partners at every stage of the 
proposed activity (including concept development, activity design, and implementation), the 
Applicant must briefly outline a plan for ensuring effective collaboration and 
communication between any proposed partners. 


5. Annexes 


 

The Annexes should be labeled as noted below and do not count towards the Technical Application 
page limit. 

 


5.1 Annex A ⎼ Theory of Change Diagram 

 

The Applicant must submit a Theory of Change Diagram; the diagram should not exceed one (1) 
page and must be in PDF format. 

 

5.2 Annex B ⎼ Staffing Pattern/ Organizational Chart 

 

The Applicant must provide an organizational chart depicting its staffing plan including the chain of 
command among staff. The chart must specify which personnel, if any, are employed by a sub-
awardee, if any. 

 

The title and position description of each of the three (3) key personnel positions proposed 
(including the Chief of Party) must be included in this Annex. 

 

5.3 Annex C - Resume and Letter of Commitment of the Chief of Party 

 

The submitted resume must include a minimum of five references with current email and 
telephone number contact information. It should be noted that USAID reserves the right to solicit 
references beyond those submitted. The resume may not exceed five pages and must, at a 
minimum, identify the start year and month and end year and month for each former/current 
employment listed. Also, a signed letter of commitment must be submitted for the Key Person 
proposed, indicating (a) his/her intention to serve for a stated term of the service [state the period 
in the letter]. 

 

5.4 Annex D ⎼ History of Performance (not to exceed 3 pages) 




 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, in the last four 
years, as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 
• Activity Title; 
• A brief description of the activity; 
• Period of Performance; 
• Award Amount; and 
• Name of at least two (2) professional contacts who most directly observed the work at the 
organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual 


 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain from any sources relevant information 
concerning an Applicant’s history of performance and may consider such information in its review 
of the Applicant’s performance risk. 

 

D.8 SUMMARY BUDGET 



 

As part of the Summary Application, Applicants will be required to submit a Summary Budget 
(ATTACHMENT B: SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE). No budget narrative is required as part 
of the Summary Budget submission. A detailed budget will not be requested until an Applicant 
moves forward to the Full Application stage and submits the budget information described in 
ATTACHMENT C: FULL APPLICATION FORMAT. 

 

D.9 FUNDING RESTRICTIONS 


 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

D.10 UNIQUE ENTITY IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT 


 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding 
agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

i. Be registered in the System for Award Management (SAM) before submitting its 
application. SAM is streamlining processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data 
multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make the process of doing business with the 
government more efficient (www.sam.gov); 
ii. Provide a valid DUNS number in its application for the applicant and all proposed sub-
recipients and subcontractors; 
iii. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are encouraged 
to register early to be eligible to apply for this NOFO. If an Applicant has not fully complied with 
the requirements by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the 
applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an 
award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://www.dnb.com/get-a-duns-number.html 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 


 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

Applicants must set forth full, accurate, and complete information as required by this NOFO. The 
penalty for making false statements to the U.S. Government is prescribed in 18 U.S.C. 1001. 

 

See Attachment G: Instructions for Registration in DUNS and sam.gov. 

 

D.11 PRE-AWARD COSTS 


 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.458 - Pre-award costs, Pre-award costs are those incurred prior to 
the effective date of the Federal award directly pursuant to the negotiation and in anticipation of the 
Federal award where such costs are necessary for efficient and timely performance of the scope of 
work. Such costs are allowable only to the extent that they would have been allowable if incurred 
after the date of the Federal award and only with the written approval of the Federal awarding 
agency. Pre-Award costs may be authorized at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. 

 

D.12 CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) 


 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits the applications. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 
ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 


 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

 

D.13 PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 



 

Upon consideration of award or during the discussions leading to an award, the selected Applicant 
may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the Agreement Officer 
to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. 

 

IMPORTANT NOTE 

 

Applicants should not submit the information below with their Applications. The information in this 
section is provided so that Applicants may become familiar with additional documentation that may 
be requested by the AO before award in order to make the responsibility determination: 

 

These documents may include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Audited financial statements for the past three (3) years that have been audited by a certified 
public accountant or other auditor satisfactory to USAID; 

 

2. Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable; 

 

3. Copies of organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting manual and 
personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, leave, differentials, 
etc., and indicate whether such policies and procedures have been reviewed and approved by 
any agency of the Federal Government. If so, provide the name, address, and phone number of 
the cognizant reviewing official; 

 

4. Other documentation, as required by the Agreement Officer, to substantiate that the Applicant: 

 

● Has adequate financial resources or the ability to obtain such resources as required during 
the performance of the Cooperative Agreement; 
● Has the ability to comply with the award’s terms and conditions, taking into account all 
existing and currently prospective commitments of the Applicant, non-governmental and 
governmental; 
● Has a satisfactory record of performance. Past relevant unsatisfactory performance is 
ordinarily sufficient to justify a finding of non-responsibility, unless there is clear evidence 
of subsequent satisfactory performance; 
● Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; 
● Is otherwise qualified and eligible to receive a Cooperative Agreement/Grant under 
applicable laws and regulations (e.g., Equal Employment Opportunity Laws). 


 

An award may be made only by the Agreement Officer after making a positive responsibility 
determination that the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management 
competence in planning and carrying out assistance programs, specifically the proposed Activity; 
and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets 
provided by USAID. 

 

For organizations that are new to working with USAID or for organizations with outstanding audit 
findings, or otherwise at USAID’s discretion, USAID may perform a pre-award survey to assess the 


72044021RFA00003USAID Partnership for Higher Education Reform

Applicant’s management and financialcapabilities. If notified by USAID that a pre-award survey isnecessary, Applicants must prepare, in advance, the required information anddocuments. See ADS

303.3.9.1 athttps://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdffor moreinformation on pre-award surveys. Please note that a pre-award survey does not commit USAID tomake any award.
[END OF SECTION D]


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 CRITERIA 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed herein are tailored to the requirements of this NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

As outlined in Section C.2, there is a minimum required cost share for this activity. Applications 
that do not meet the minimum cost share requirement may not eligible for award consideration. 
While it is a minimum requirement for eligibility, cost share will not be considered in the merit 
review criteria. 

 

E.2 TECHNICAL EVALUATION FACTORS 


 

Technical applications will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using the criteria 
shown in this Section. The criteria below are presented by major categories and in descending order 
of importance so that the Applicants know which areas require emphasis in the preparation of the 
applications. 

 

E.2.1 Technical Solution (See Section D.7) 










 

The extent to which the proposed technical solution demonstrates a clear understanding of the 
activity objectives and expected outcomes, a convincing approach to achieve them, and a 
sound plan for the lasting sustainability of activity outcomes. 

 

E.2.2 Institutional Experience (See Section D.7) 










 

The extent to which the Prime Applicant convincingly demonstrates relevant experience 
enhancing the likelihood of successful activity implementation. 

 

E.2.3 Staffing Plan & Key Personnel (See Section D.7) 










 

The extent to which the proposed staffing plan and proposed Chief of Party convincingly 
demonstrate the ability to effectively manage and implement the proposed activity adaptively 
and successfully. 

 

E.3 COST/BUSINESS APPLICATION EVALUATION 


 

If an Applicant proceeds to the Full Application stage their proposed full budget will be evaluated. 
This review will determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the cost principles 
found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. USAID will also consider (1) the extent of the Applicant’s 
understanding of the financial aspects of the program and the Applicant’s ability to perform the 
activities within the amount requested; (2) whether the Applicant’s plans will achieve the program 


objectives with reasonable economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating 
to costs should be included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 200.306, 
2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision “Cost Sharing (Matching)” for U.S. entities, or the 
Standard Provision “Cost Share” for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient 
has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial 
resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the 
program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk 
assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific 
conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

E.4 DETERMINATION OF AWARD 


 

The submitted technical information will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using 
the criteria shown above. The cost/business application will be reviewed by the Agreement 
Officer/Agreement Specialist. As a result of this process, USAID intends to select the apparently 
successful recipient based upon the initial application submission. Once the selection is made, the 
Government may address any concerns to the selected recipient for resolution. However, the 
Government reserves the right to negotiate with all applicants prior to selection of the successful 
recipient if in the best interest of the Government. 

 

If USAID and the apparently successful Applicant cannot come to a mutual understanding during 
the course of discussions, or if the apparently successful Applicant is unable to provide satisfactory 
Technical and Cost Applications, or does not meet deadlines for submissions, or presents an 
unacceptable risk as a result of the risk assessment, then the Agreement Officer may designate the 
next highest-evaluated Applicant as the apparently successful Applicant. This decision is at the sole 
discretion of the Agreement Officer. The Agreement Officer’s decision regarding funding of an 
award is final and not subject to review. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1 FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential Applicant is hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

F.2 ADMINISTRATION 


 

Awards will be made under relevant federal regulations and agency policy. For U.S non-
governmental organizations, awards must be administered according to 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, 
and USAID Standard Provisions will apply (https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa). For 
non U.S. non- governmental organizations, USAID provisions for non U.S. non-government 
organizations will apply (https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

F.3 PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL REPORTING 


 

Financial reporting requirements will depend on the method of payment. Recipients will comply 
with the financial reporting requirements set forth in the USAID standard provisions. If advance 
payments are provided, reporting periods are calendar quarters or parts thereof. Quarterly financial 
reports are due not later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. If payment is on a 
reimbursement basis, financial reports may be submitted monthly, but not less frequently than 30 
days after the end of each calendar quarter. Regardless of whether payments are on an advance or 
reimbursement basis, the final financial report is due not later than 90 days after the estimated 
completion date of the award. The Recipient shall also comply with the USAID standard provision 
entitled “Reporting Host Government Taxes.” 

 

F.4 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 


 

Program Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

 

All written documentation must be submitted in professional-level English. The reports listed below 
are the initial reports required by the recipient. Based on the evolving nature of the agreement, 
USAID may provide modified reporting requirements. 

 

Note: USAID’s fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30. Four fiscal quarterly 

periods begin on October 1, January 1, April 1, and July 1. 


 





Reports and Deliverables 



Due Dates 



Delivery 



1. Project Approval 


Immediately following the award, 
the Recipient shall initiate the 
process to obtain the project 
approval from GVN. 

Project Approval 



2. Activity Start-up Plan 


Within 60 calendar days after award. 
The plan should outline the 
Recipients plan for project approval, 
staffing, analyses, start-up workshop 
and work plan and CLA approach 
preparation. 

Electronically 

AOR 



3. Start-up workshop 


Within 120 calendar days after award 
to inform activity theory of change, 
work plan, and CLA approach. 

Workshop with USAID 
and relevant partners 



4. Annual Work Plan 


First work plan – 160 calendar day 

 

Subsequent annual work plans due 
September 1 of each subsequent 
Agreement year 

Electronically 

AOR 



5. Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning 
(MEL) Plan 


30 days after the finalization of the 
first year work plan. 

Electronically 

AOR 



6. Quarterly Progress 
Reports 


By January 30th, April 30th, July 31st, 
and October 30th of each year 

Electronically 

AOR 

Financial Analyst Team 



7. Annual Pause and Reflect 
Sessions 


Planned and facilitated as a key input 
to the annual work plan and annual 
performance report. 

Workshop with USAID 
and relevant partners 



8. Annual Performance 
Report 


January 30th of each year 

Electronically 

AOR 



9. Final Report 


30 calendar days prior to the end of 
the Agreement 

Electronically 

AOR 



10. Financial reports 


Quarterly financial report: 30 
calendar days after the end of each 
USG fiscal quarter 

Electronically 

COR 

Financial Analyst Team 






Final financial report: 90 days 
following the expiration of the award 



 

1. Project approval - In order to fully implement the activity, the Recipient is required to comply 
with Decree No. 56/2020 ND-CP9 and obtain project approval from the GVN. A report, which 
outlines the implications of the new GVN Decree No. 56/2020/ND-CP on the Management and 
Use of Official Development Assistance (ODA) and Concessional Loans from Foreign Donors 
on USAID programming will be shared with the Recipient upon award. Project approval is 
expected to take approximately six (06) months, as such the Recipient is requested to initiate 
the process immediately following award. While seeking project approval, in close 
consultation with the AOR, the Recipient shall consider staffing and related consequence 
impacting implementation to ensure an efficient use of resources. 


9 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1tA_Gwm3sCynTRIO0fMMggq08jm_rgMB3/view 

 

2. Activity Start-up Plan - Within 60 days post-award the Recipient will submit an activity start-
up plan to identify plans for the project approval, start-up workshop, the work plan and the 
CLA approach. The activity start-up plan should also identify any initial assessments planned 
by the Recipient. More details on the format of the start-up plan will be provided after award. 


 

3. Start-up Workshop - Within 120 days post-award the Recipient will hold a workshop that 
includes USAID staff and relevant partners to guide development of the first year work plan, 
activity theory of change and CLA approach. The workshop will also serve to define format 
and requirements for deliverables and reporting. The objective of the workshop is to provide a 
dedicated forum for the activity consortium, USAID staff and other relevant partners to 
collaborate to refine the submitted technical approach, theory of change, and CLA approach. 
Note, at the discretion of the AOR, this workshop may include or be done collectively with 
other mission implementing partners working on higher education. 


 

4. Annual Work Plan - The annual work plan details how the Recipient will use the work plan 
year effectively to achieve the activity objectives and strategic approaches. The work plan 
serves as a guide to program implementation and, once approved, represents an agreement as 
to the objectives and timing of specific tasks and interventions. The work plan is intended to be 
an annual roadmap for USAID and the Recipient. It should be closely aligned to the theory of 
change agreed upon during the start-up workshop, and clearly explain how the actions and 
outputs will lead to the expected outcomes identified in the theory of change. A Collaborating, 
Learning & Adapting (CLA) approach should form the basis of the work plan; CLA is required 
at each stage of implementation of the activity. This CLA approach will be expected to ensure 
that the activity is strategically coordinated with relevant actors, grounded in a strong evidence 
base, and iteratively adapted to remain relevant throughout implementation. The CLA 
approach should identify the Recipient’s plans for identifying the most appropriate local actors 
to collaborate with, facilitating multi-stakeholder collaboration, assessing implementation 
progress and challenges, using evidence and data in programming, identifying and prioritizing 
emerging opportunities for USAID and other leaders in higher education sector in Vietnam, 
and how it will adjust programming based on new learning or changes in context. The 



Recipient will consult with USAID to finalize their CLA approach. More details on the format 
of the work plan will be provided after award. 


 

To provide flexibility to the Recipient, significant deviations from the work plan can be 
documented in a semi-annual addendum to enable adjustments to implementation based on 
learning. 

 

5. Activity Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (MEL) - In accordance with USAID policy, the 
Recipient will submit an Activity MEL Plan demonstrating the activity’s monitoring approach 
and relevant performance indicators of activity outputs; plans for collaborating on external 
evaluations; proposed internal evaluations and learning activities; and the Recipient’s proposed 
roles for MEL actions. The MEL plan should flow logically from the CLA approaches 
identified in the work plan and should be framed by, and closely aligned with, the agreed-upon 
activity theory of change. The MEL plan reflects the award progress over the life of the 
Activity and is a critical tool for planning, managing, evaluating performance, and learning. 
Findings from the MEL should be reviewed and validated in annual pause-and reflect-sessions 
with USAID staff, and revised when appropriate in consultation with the AOR. More details on 
the format of the MEL plan will be provided after award. 


 

6. Quarterly Performance Reports - The Recipient will submit quarterly performance reports to 
reflect progress, the activities of the preceding three months and lessons learned. The report 
must describe the tasks completed in the last three months relative to what was anticipated in 
the approved work plan, and will assess the overall activity impact to date relative to the 
performance indicator targets and results defined in the activity theory of change. More details 
on the format of the quarterly performance reports will be provided after award. 


 

7. Annual Pause-and-Reflect Sessions (APR) - Annual pause and reflect (APR) sessions should 
precede and inform the development of the annual work plan and annual performance report. 
These will form the basis for a management review conducted by USAID and program staff to 
assess: program directions, priorities, achievements, and prior year implementation results; 
management and implementation impediments; and recommendations for adaptive 
management actions. The format, participation and final output of the APR will be defined 
through consultation with the AOR and can entail a series of internal meetings, a multi-day 
workshop, or a brief report to summarize learning and major conclusions about the 
effectiveness of the actions and strategic approaches to achieve the activity objectives. The 
APR may be used to suggest refinements or updates to the activity theory of change, CLA 
approach, and subsequent annual work plans. Note, at the discretion of the AOR, APRs may 
include or be done collectively with other mission implementing partners working higher 
education sector. Note that the APR replaces one of the quarterly pause and reflect sessions. 


 

8. Annual Performance Report - Annual performance reports will summarize actions, progress 
and results during the year in relation to the approved work plan and the activity theory of 
change it supports. The report should include lessons learned, proposed adaptive management 
shifts, and proposed updates to the theory of change. The annual performance report will be 
used by USAID to assess the status of activity implementation. Each annual performance 
report will include an assessment as to whether the activity strategic approaches and actions are 



leading to the activity objectives. The annual performance report will cover all of the items 
included in the quarterly performance report, with a focus on the Activity results over the 
entire year. More details on the format of the annual performance report will be provided after 
award. 


 

9. Final Report - The Final Report must discuss all strategic approaches and results from the 
start of the award through its completion. More details on the format of the final report will be 
provided after award. 


 

10. Financial Reports: Financial Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard 
Provisions. 


 

Quarterly Financial Report: Quarterly Financial Reports shall be due within 30 days 
following the end of each quarter corresponding to USAID’s fiscal year from October 1 
through September 30. 

 

Final Financial Report: The Final Financial Report shall be due within 90 days following the 
expiration of the award. Financial Reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700. USAID 
requires recipients to use the Standard Form 425 or Standard Form 425a, Federal Financial 
Report, or such other forms authorized for obtaining financial information as may be approved 
by OMB. 

 

Financial reports shall be submitted as follows: Financial Analyst, Office of Financial 
Management (email: hanoiusaidfa@usaid.gov) and the AOR. 

 

F.5 SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION 


 

USAID recipients must submit one electronic copy of development experience documentation to 
the Development Experience Clearinghouse. Development experience documentation may be 
submitted online: http://dec.usaid.gov. Or by mail (for pouch delivery): 

 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

Phone: (202) 712-0579 

Email: docsubmit@usaid.gov 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR for the award. 

 

F.6 PROGRAM INCOME 


 

Program Income earned under the resultant award will be added to the Total Estimated 

Amount (exclusive of cost share) in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307(e)(2). 

[END OF SECTION F] 


 REFERENCES 

 

1. USAID/Vietnam CDCS 
2. USAID/Vietnam Innovation Assessment Report 
3. USAID/Vietnam Private Sector Landscape Assessment 
4. USAID/Innovation Ecosystem Analysis 
5. USAID Education Policy 
6. USAID Higher Education Program Framework 
7. World Bank Vietnam National University Project PAD 


 

 

 

 

[END OF ATTACHMENT A] 


 SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

NOFO No. 72044021RFA00003 

USAID Partnership for Higher Education Reform 

 



Line Item 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

Year 5 

Total 
Amount 
(USD) 



Salary and Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Travel and Transportation 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Equipment & Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Subawards 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Indirect Charges, if any 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Total Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Cost Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Total Costs plus Cost Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Leveraged funds, if any 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Total Activity Costs Plus 
Leveraged funds 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 


 FULL APPLICATION FORMAT 

NOTE: USAID IS NOT REQUESTING THIS INFORMATION AT THIS TIME. THE 
MOST HIGHLY RATED APPLICANT(S) WILL BE REQUESTED BY USAID TO 
SUBMIT A FULL APPLICATION FOLLOWING THE EVALUATION OF SUMMARY 
APPLICATIONS. 

 

Following the evaluation of Summary Applications, the most highly rated Applicant(s) shall be 
requested to submit a Full Application to provide greater detail of the proposed activity. This 
Attachment provides an overview of the Full Application Format to provide interested 
organizations with a preview of what information may be requested by USAID as part of the Full 
Application stage, but note that this list is subject to change. Full Applications must address the 
comments and instructions provided by USAID in the Full Application Request Letter. 

 

Full Applications will have the following sections, which expand on the information provided in the 
Summary Applications. 

 

● Technical Application 
o Cover Page (See Section D.7 above for requirements) 
o Program Description; 
o Management Plan; 



● Cost Application 
o Cover Page (See Section D.7 above for requirements) 
o SF 424 Form(s) 
o Budget and Budget Narrative; 
o Certifications and Representations; 
o Branding and Marking Plan; 





 

A.1. TECHNICAL APPLICATION 

 

Additional information might be provided at the time of the request for Full Application. It is 
anticipated that a portion of the successful application will become the Program Description for the 
award resulting from this NOFO. 

 

i. Program Description: A detailed description of how the Applicant intends on achieving 
the objectives described in this solicitation. 


 

ii. Management Plan: Applicants will clearly present the management and administrative 
arrangements to oversee execution of the proposed activities; organizational structure; 
logistical support; functions and responsibilities of key personnel and other staff, including 
any sub-awards; and management of USAID award compliance. 


 

A.2. COST APPLICATION - BUDGET AND BUDGET NARRATIVE FORMAT 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205 


 

1. Cover Page 














 

The Cost Application Cover Page must contain the same information as the Technical Application 
Cover Page. 

 

2. SF 424 Form(s) 














 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 





Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 





Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 





Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 





Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 





Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 





Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

3. Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

While there is no page limit for this portion, Applicants are encouraged to be as clear and concise as 
possible, but still provide the necessary detail to address the following: 

 

● The budget to be presented under Cost/Business Application should relate to results 
specified in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description, and delineate the cost inputs or 
each result. 
● The proposed budget should provide cost estimates for the management of the program 
(including program monitoring, baseline assessments and assessments for environmental 
compliance). Applicant should minimize their administrative and support costs for 
managing the project to maximize the funds available for project activities. 
● The breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to costs of, if applicable, 
headquarters, regional, country, and/or local offices. 
● The breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization or subcontractor/ 
subgrantee involved in the program. 
● The costs associated with external, expatriate technical assistance and those associated with 
local in-country technical assistance. 
● The breakdown of the financial and in-kind (cost share) contributions of all organizations 
involved in implementing this Activity. 



 

● Potential contributions of non-USAID or private commercial donors to this agreement. 
● A procurement plan for commodities. 


 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum (all 
formulas must be displayed, and the budget must not be locked): 

 

i. Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the activity(ies). 
ii. Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s activity(ies) and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
iii. Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the Activity. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

1) Salary and Allowances– Direct salaries and wages must be proposed in accordance with the 
applicant's personnel policies and must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, and 
salary escalation factors. Allowances, when proposed, should be broken down by specific type 
and by person. Allowances should be in accordance with the applicant’s policies and the 
applicable regulations and policies. Explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. If the 
organization has standing policies across all projects for annual salary escalations that exceed 
current inflation rates, those policies and the effective date of those policies must be provided 
with the application. The Applicant must also confirm that the policy applies to all staff across 
all projects. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an agency 
of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its approval. 
If an Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the Applicant must propose a rate 
and explain how the Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must 
include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, 
gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation –Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as 
company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and 
quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the 
basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and 



reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market 
conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value 
of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the activity to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
sub-recipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as 
the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be provided 
over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis of 
calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the cost share 
(financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the resulting 
award. 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 
miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the activity proposed by the applicant. The applicant 
should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and 
their relationship to the objectives of the activity, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the 
narrative should be minimal. 


 

Note: Foreign Government Delegations to International Conferences: Funds in this agreement 
may not be used to finance the travel, per diem, hotel expenses, meals, conference fees or other 
conference costs for any member of a foreign government’s delegation to an international 
conference sponsored by a public international organization. 

 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and 
provide the applicable supporting information: 


 



Method 

Eligibility 

Initial application requirements 



Direct Charge 
Only 

Any applicant 

See above on direct costs 



Existing 
Negotiated 
Indirect Cost 
Rate 
Agreement 
(NICRA) 

Any applicant 
with an 
approved 
NICRA 

Submit your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed 
practices. 



De minimis 
rate of 10% of 
modified total 
direct costs 
(MTDC) 

Any applicant 
that has never 
received a 
NICRA 

Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct 
costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently 
charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected 
must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such 
time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate for a rate, 
which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. 




The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges 
indirectly vs. directly. 





Indirect Costs 
Charged As A 
Fixed Amount 

Certain U.S. 
educational 
institutions & 
non U.S. non-
profit 
organizations 
may request, 
but approval is 
at the 
discretion of 
the AO 

Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following (For Education institutions, see 2 CFR 
200 App III): 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for previous fiscal 
year and estimates for the current year 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day 
operations of the organization, including categories such 
as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are 
identifiable to more than one program or activity(ies), 
such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and 
maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the 
previous fiscal year and estimates for the current year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably 
and consistently across all programs and activities of using 
a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity(ies) to which the cost applies. 




No current 
NICRA, but 
applicant has 
an indirect 
rate other than 
the de 
minimis 

Any applicant 
may request 
but approval is 
at the 
discretion of 
the Agency 

A NICRA may be negotiated after award at the discretion of 
the Agency. Provisional rates may be set forth in the contract 
subject to audit and finalization. The applicant must identify 
the indirect cost rate and base it is proposing. See USAID’s 
Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for 
further guidance. 



 

The Applicant must submit a Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement NICRA if the 
organization has such an agreement with an agency or department of the U.S. 
Government. If no NICRA the Applicant should submit the following: 

 

o Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public Accountant 
(CPA) documenting the review of the financial statements was performed in accordance 
with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; that management is 
responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in 
accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework and for designing, 
implementing and maintaining internal control relevant to the preparation. The account 
must also state the he or she is not aware of any material modifications that should be 
made to the financial statements; or 
o Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issues a report documenting the audit 
was conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the 
financial statements are the responsibility of management, provides an opinion that the 
financial statements present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the 
company and the results of operations are in conformity with the applicable financial 
reporting framework (or issues a qualified opinion if the financial statements are not in 
conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework). 



 

4. Certifications and Representations 














 

The Applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application. 

 

a. The Applicant shall complete the required certifications and sign and date in the signature space 
provided. http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
b. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
c. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and 
Assistance (M/OAA). 




 

5. Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 














 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 
to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting award 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and 
how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an 
award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the 
budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with 
the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the 
grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such 
as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 




 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 




 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as 
found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section 







VI of the RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use 
of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 
(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the 
proposed logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator 
approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 






 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 




 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 




 

(i) Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 
country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 
forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is 
from the American People.” 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support 
this project or program. 






 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 




 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, 
and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 




 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 


 


Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that 
will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, 
with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the 
Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of 
the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute 
logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 
the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the 
award, including: 




 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio- visual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or 
disaster relief programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the 
USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise 
acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 






 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 




 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 







deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 
and where the applicant will place the marking; 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 






 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation 
of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 




 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. 
The applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or 
program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the 
award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples 
of material for which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The 
applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 
particular item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or 
product. 
(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the 
item or commodity would impair its functionality. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 
must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm 
or otherwise be inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 






 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure 
the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 


 

6. Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 


Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for 
prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost 
elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the applicant 
must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost 
elements require prior written approval. 

 

7. Approval of Subawards 














 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time 
of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• DUNS Number 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

[END OF ATTACHMENT C] 


 FULL APPLICATION BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

The budget is the financial expression of the Activity. The following template represents an 
example of what USAID anticipates receiving in an Activity budget with Application submission. 

 

NOFO No. 72044021RFA00003 

USAID Partnership for Higher Education Reform 

 



 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year … 

Total 5 years 



Cost Element 

Unit 

Amt 
(US$) 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

Unit 

Amt 
(US$) 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 

… 

… 

… 

… 

USAID 

Cost 
Share 



Total Direct Labor 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1. Headquarter 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



a) Salary/Wages 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



2. Country Office(s) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



a) Salary/Wages 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Consultants 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Travel, Transportation 
and Per Diem 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Training/Conference 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Subawards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Subawardee A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Subawardee B 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Total Estimated Cost 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 


 PLANNED PRE-AWARD SCHEDULE 

 





Pre-Award Milestone 



Anticipated Date 





RFA Posted on grants.gov 



March 05, 2021 





Due date for Receipt of Q&A 



March 15, 2021 





Due Date for Summary Applications 



April 08, 2021 





USAID Reviews Summary Applications 



April 12, 2021 





Co-Creation with Selected Applicants 



May 04 – May 14, 2021 





USAID Requests Full Application 



May 17, 2021 





Due date for receipt of Full Application 



May 31, 2021 





Discussions with Finalist completed 



June 11, 2021 





Anticipated Award Date 



June 30, 2021 



 

[END OF ATTACHMENT E: PLANNED PRE-AWARD SCHEDULE] 


 STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 
The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that is 
selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory and 
required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 



Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 



TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 



 

x 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



 

x 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 



 

x 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 



 

x 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 



x 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 



x 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 



 

x 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 



x 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 



x 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 



 

x 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

x 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



x 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 






 

x 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 



 

x 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



x 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

x 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 



x 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 



x 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 



 

x 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 



 

x 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 



 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 



TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 



TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 



RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



x 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 



x 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



x 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 



x 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 



x 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 



x 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 






 

x 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 



x 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 



x 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 



x 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 



 

x 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

x 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



 

x 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 



 

x 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

x 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

x 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 



x 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 



x 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 



 

x 

RAA30. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

x 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 


 INSTRUCTIONS FOR REGISTRATION IN DUNS AND SAM.GOV 

 

D-U-N-S Numbers 

 

The Data Universal Number System (DUNS) number is a unique nine-character number that 

identifies your organization. It is a tool of the federal government to track how federal money is 

distributed. If your organization does not know its DUNS number or needs to register for one, 

visit Dun & Bradstreet website: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform/displayHomePage.do. 

 

How long should it take? 

 

If requested over the phone, DUNS is provided immediately. Web form requests take 1 to 2 

business days. List of Information you will need to obtain a DUNS number (if your organization 

does not already have one): 

● Name of organization 

● Organization address 

● Name of the CEO/organization owner 

● Legal structure of the organization (corporation, partnership, proprietorship) 

● Year the organization started 

● Primary type of business 

● Total number of employees (full and part time) 

If your organization does not have a DUNS number, use the Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) online 

registration to receive one free of charge. 

 

How do I get my D-U-N-S Number? 

Visit D-U-N-S Request Service to obtain more detailed instructions on applying for your DUNS 

Number. Also, visit the System for Award Management (SAM). 

 

SAM 

 

The System for Award Management (SAM) is combining federal procurement systems and the 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance into one new system 

 

Register/Update Entity 

You can register your Entity (business, individual, or government agency) to do business with 

the Federal Government. If you are interested in registering or updating your Entity, you must first 
create a user account. Visit https://www.sam.gov for registration. 

 


