TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description 

 

 

Section B – Federal Award Information 

 

 

Section C – Eligibility Information 

 

 

Section D – Application and Submission Information 

 

 

Section E – Application Review Information 

 

 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information 

 

 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 

 

 

Section H – Other Information 

 

 

Annex 1 – Summary Budget Template 

 

 

Annex 2 – Branding and Marking Guidance 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

1. INTRODUCTION 


Over 50 years of armed conflict in Colombia tore through the social fabric, polarized society, 
and produced 9.1 million officially registered armed conflict victims. The 2016 Peace Accords 
officially ended the armed conflict with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), 
but much work is required to completely implement the Accords and to achieve national 
reconciliation. The 2016 Accords also reinforced the 2011 Victims Law, which defined the rights 
of conflict victims and recognized the importance of supporting victims to achieve national 
reconciliation. According to the Kroc Institute, which has been monitoring the rate of 
Colombia’s peace implementation, only 28 percent of the Accords have been completed1. While 
Kroc concluded that it is on par with the pace of implementation of other peace agreements, 
efforts to advance peace implementation must be accelerated. Peace implementation is especially 
important as the recent resurgence in violence and the COVID-19 pandemic threaten what has 
been achieved. 

1 Kroc Institute report of May 2021. 

 

Over the past ten years, USAID has supported the Government of Colombia (GOC) to develop 
the institutional architecture and processes needed to carry out the Victims Law. USAID 
supported the GOC to establish the Victims and Land Restitution Unit, a comprehensive victims 
registry, and spaces for dialogue between the Victims Unit and victims’ organizations. These 
actions helped the GOC advance land restitution, individual and collective reparations, and 
adherence to Colombia’s Constitutional Court rulings related to victims’ issues. By the end of 
2019, however, the Victims Unit had processed individual reparations for less than 1.1 million 
victims and collective reparations to 17 out of the 775 identified subjects. At this rate, it will 
take over sixty years for all victims to receive individual reparations and even longer to receive 
collective reparations. 

The Colombian Congress extended the Victims Law to 2031 to allow more time to redress 
victims and ensure they can participate fully in society. The Victims Unit must now accelerate 
its work and coordinate more efficiently with the relevant government bodies that comprise the 
National System for the Assistance and Reparation of Victims (SNARIV) to provide 
reparations. This is needed to guarantee victims’ full rights in a more timely manner, and to 
facilitate national reconciliation and the creation of a more stable and peaceful country. 

The Peace Accords stated the need for truth, justice, reparations, and non-repetition to achieve 
reconciliation in Colombian society. The Accords established the Comprehensive System for 
Peace and its three institutions: the Truth Commission; the Unit for the Search for Missing 
Persons (UBPD); and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP). These entities’ work is critical to 
build trust and social cohesion in Colombia. Together, they will establish the truth of what 
happened during the conflict and administer transitional justice for victims. Despite progress 


made thus far, assistance could expedite and deepen SIVJRN results. The JEP requires political 
support to advance cases and support victims’ participation, protection, and access to restorative 
measures. Additionally, the Truth Commission’s mandate will end in late 2022 and 
disseminating and implementing its recommendations will require nationwide support to lay the 
groundwork for non-repetition. Progress within the UBPD to locate 100,000 disappeared 
persons has been slow and must advance more quickly. 

Concrete SIVJRN advancements will contribute to national reconciliation, but additional efforts 
are required to restore social bonds. Reconciliation is a process that must address the impact that 
conflict and violence have at the individual and community level. Reconciliation also involves 
mending the broken relationships from the conflict. Reconciliation requires intentionality and 
the active participation of the entire Colombian society. In 2019, only nine percent of 
Colombians trusted the national government, 13 percent trusted the private sector, and 22 percent 
trusted their neighbors.2 One out of every four Colombians also believe that physical or verbal 
aggression is necessary to solve everyday problems, and 88 percent of Colombians think that 
individuals only look after their own interests.3 Sustained efforts are required to recover and 
strengthen Colombia’s social fabric and community trust to support the country’s transition to 
peace. 

2 Reconciliation Barometer, USAID. 

3 Ibíd. 

4 Including civil society organizations, private sector, academia, among others. 

 

USAID’s Restoring Our Future Activity will build on previous efforts to advance the willingness 
and ability of Colombians,4 including victims, to come to terms with the past and restore the 
social and community fabric. This Activity will strengthen dialogue, resilience, and trust to 
advance the guarantees of non-repetition and make peace irreversible and long lasting. The 
Activity will build off results and lessons from past programming, adopt a territorial approach to 
strengthen institutional processes, and scale-up reconciliation capacities from the individual to 
the community level. 

2. BACKGROUND 


Achieving reconciliation in Colombia has multiple challenges. First, efforts to build memory 
and advance truth-telling need to be mainstreamed across public and private actors. All 
Colombians have a role in achieving national reconciliation and sustaining peace in the long 
term. Peace is not only a matter concerning victims and institutional actors, but all stakeholders: 
private sector, media, academia, among others. 

Second, certain conditions support reconciliation. Colombians believe that the conditions most 
favorable to reconciliation are higher when there are: improved social, cultural, and economic 
levels (61%); increased presence of the government (56%); and the demobilization of armed 
groups (52%). Peace-building efforts around the world indicate the importance of truth-telling 
mechanisms to deliver closure to societies and allow them to come to terms with the past and be 
willing to build a new future. Colombians agree (94%) that it is important to establish the truth 
after an armed conflict as a way to heal the past. 


Third, advancing the rights of millions of victims is a significant hurdle that already has required 
intense effort from the GOC and other actors. Even with the advances that the SNARIV has 
made, there are still a very large number of victims that lack reparations, especially among ethnic 
populations who are disproportionately affected by the conflict. Addressing the needs of victims 
in Colombia will help the country make progress on its development priorities and the 
implementation of the Peace Accords. According to Victims’ Unit data, over 34% of victims are 
youth, over 18% are members of ethnic groups, and close to 49% are women. These groups face 
additional disadvantages, such as limited access to educational and employment 
opportunities. Victims, especially these groups, need to overcome their current state of 
vulnerability to more effectively contribute to their communities’ development. 

USAID/Colombia has worked for over ten years in supporting the GOC’s effort to protect 
victims’ rights and to create an enabling environment for reconciliation and peacebuilding. Past 
efforts have centered on institutional strengthening with a special focus on: the establishment and 
consolidation of national-level institutions and their territorial presence; strengthening and 
developing methodologies for psychosocial and physical rehabilitation services for victims; 
supporting transitional justice institutions and victims’ participation in such spaces; 
strengthening a differential approach in the state’s service delivery and policy development in 
response to victims’ needs; and the institutional adjustments needed to implement Peace Accords 
on issues pertaining victims and reparation. On reconciliation, USAID has improved capacities 
of civil society organizations and local authorities to advance truth-telling and memory-building 
initiatives; created awareness and mobilized individuals around peace and reconciliation; and 
developed multi sector (community, public and private) initiatives to bridge sectors and create 
trust and cohesion in violence-affected communities. 

Restoring Our Future will advance reconciliation, consolidate peace, and support non-repetition 
of the conflict and violence in Colombia. It will use differential approaches for each 
demographic of victims, communities, and types of organizations. 

3. USAID/COLOMBIA STRATEGY 


This Activity will advance USAID’s efforts to build a more cohesive and inclusive society 
resilient to conflict, which is Development Objective 1 of the 2020-2025 Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy (CDCS). More specifically, this Activity contributes to IR 1.1, Individuals 
Empowered to Recover from Violence, by helping individuals recover from violence, supporting 
reintegration processes, and supporting truth-telling and reparations. This Activity also 
contributes to IR 1.2, Enhanced Community Capacity to Prevent Violence, by developing trust 
and reconciliation through collective action and the involvement of public, private and 
community stakeholders. By enhancing institutional capacities to deliver services to victims, the 
Activity contributes to IR 2.1: Expanded state presence and more community-responsive state 
service delivery systems. 

4. THEORY OF CHANGE 


Restoring Our Future is based on the following theory of change. 

IF Colombia’s public institutions are able to guarantee victims’ rights, victims’ organizations are 
empowered to advocate for their rights, and individual and collective capacities and disposition 


to reconcile are enhanced, THEN Colombians will be able to recover from violence, and prevent 
the repetition of armed conflict within their communities. 

This theory of change is based on the following assumptions: 

● Implementation of the Victims Law and the Peace Accords will continue to be a priority 
in the public agenda, will receive sufficient public funding to achieve results, and will be 
included in regional and local policies and development plans. 
● Public institutions will maintain or increase funding levels for victims’ assistance and 
PDET implementation through political transitions. 
● SIJVRN institutions will continue to operate as planned. 
● Economic re-activation efforts due to the COVID-19 pandemic will complement, rather 
than detract from, efforts to support peace and PDET implementation. 
● Restrictive biosecurity measures relating to COVID-19 will ease with time, allowing for 
increased movement, in-person meetings and larger gatherings to take place during 
implementation. 
● Political polarization and violence may increase during the upcoming electoral 
processes. 
● Among other signs of deteriorating security conditions in some rural areas, social leaders, 
human rights defenders, and former combatants in the process of reincorporation face 
high security risks. 
● The private sector continues recognizing itself as a key player in peace building scenarios 
and directs their investments accordingly. 
5. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND OBJECTIVES 
5.1. Results Framework 





The Restoring Our Future activity’s purpose is to advance reconciliation and prevent repetition 
of the conflict by protecting victims’ rights; supporting comprehensive memory, truth, and 
justice; and strengthening trust and social cohesion among individuals, communities, and public 
and private sector actors. 

To achieve this purpose, the activity will work based on the following results framework. 

Restoring Our Future Activity Results Framework 




5.2 Objectives 





Objective 1: 

Institutions protect victims’ 
rights and advance 
reconciliation. 

Objective 2: 

Victims’ organizations 
effectively exercise 
victims’ rights and support 
reconciliation. 

Objective 3: 

Communities are more 
willing to reconcile and 
contribute to the nonrepetition 
of conflict. 

IR 1.1: Technical capacities of 
institutions that protect victims’ 
rights and advance reconciliation 
strengthened. 

IR 2.1: Technical capacity 
and performance of 
victims’ organizations 
strengthened. 

IR 3.1: Community capacity 
to advance truth telling, 
dialogue, and memory 
building enhanced. 

IR 1.2: Coordination between 
relevant local and national 
institutions enhanced. 

 IR 2.2: Key participation 
spaces for victims generate 
social impact. 

 

IR 3.2: Community trust and 
cooperation increased 
through economic 
partnerships. 

 

 

IR 3.3: Community prosocial 
behaviors contribute to 
reconciliation and peaceful 
coexistence. 



 

Through this results framework, the Activity will improve public and private institutions, 
victims’ organizations, and individual citizens’ abilities to promote victims’ rights and 
reconciliation in Colombia. 

The Activity will mainstream two approaches across all objectives: the development of 
individual skills to enable behavioral change in favor of reconciliation; and a psychosocial 
approach. First, individuals must acquire and strengthen a set of skills to resolve conflicts 
through non-violence, accept change, and respect diversity to promote reconciliation. By 
advancing these competencies at the individual level, the Activity will set a strong foundation for 
behavioral change and support the transition of individuals (including those part of public 
entities) and communities from a violence-driven state to one where dialogue is used to address 
conflict. 

Second, the Activity will integrate a psychosocial approach across objectives and intermediate 
results (IRs). This approach focuses on individual and collective care. It enables individuals and 
communities to improve their emotional status, establish healthy relationships, and develop 
peaceful coexistence and non-violent conflict resolution capacities. The psychosocial approach 
will be developed in close coordination with the USAID Weaving Lives and Hope Activity to 
enrich the methodologies used, avoid duplication of efforts in the same geographic area, and 
comply with USAID/Colombia’s Regional Integration Strategy (RIS). 


Objective 1: Institutions protect victims' rights and advance reconciliation. 

This objective will advance the GOC’s institutional response to support reconciliation and 
protect victims’ rights as defined in the Victim’s Law and the Peace Accord. Past programming 
supported the GOC’s efforts to design, implement and consolidate the national institutional 
arrangement to assist victims. National-level SNARIV institutions demonstrate varying levels of 
capacity to carry out their mandates, while local governments and local branches of SNARIV 
institutions struggle to implement relevant components of the Peace Accords and Victims 
Law. Weak coordination between local and national actors, and between local entities, impedes 
reparations and attention to victims. 

Restoring Our Future will strengthen and consolidate capacities of institutions, both at national 
and local levels, that provide services to victims, support the mandate of the Comprehensive 
Peace System, promote reconciliation, and implement provisions of the Peace Accord under their 
responsibility. The Activity will also advance reconciliation efforts led by the State by bringing 
together different sectors of society, particularly community members and former offenders, to 
achieve common goals. Additionally, the Activity will strengthen coordination mechanisms 
convened by institutional actors that have the most impact or potential to have impact. Many of 
these mechanisms have significant bottlenecks that impede the effective response and 
implementation of relevant policies and programs. 

IR 1.1: Technical capacities of institutions that protect victims’ rights and advance 
reconciliation strengthened. The GOC needs to reach more victims and expedite 
reparations. While much progress has been made, reparations processes remain lengthy and 
difficult to navigate. According to stakeholders, the greatest institutional gaps are at the local 
level, where institutions have limited human, technical and financial capacities to deliver 
assistance and reparations to victims. National entities also require continued support to more 
efficiently respond to victims’ needs, particularly as continued violence creates more eligible 
victims. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Relevant institutions (e.g., Victims Unit, ARN, ART, Ministry of Interior, Mayor’s 
Offices, Ombudsman Office) fulfill their obligations to respond to victims in a way that 
respects their ethnicity, gender, and other identities. 
● National and local-level institutions implement selected collective reparation plans and 
Return Plans for Victims. 
● Collective reparation processes are integrated into Development Plans with a Territorial 
Focus (PDET), are sustainable, and implemented at the local-level using trauma-informed 
and victim-centered approaches. 
● Government actors, such as the Agency for Reincorporation and Normalization (ARN), 
implement reconciliation processes in targeted geographies. 
● Community reintegration and reincorporation strategies benefit communities receiving 
former combatants, mitigate existing conflicts, and prevent new forms of violence. 
● The institutions of the Comprehensive Peace System respond to victims and include 
victims’ participation. 
● The UBPD implements regional plans to search for missing persons. 
● Restorative measures that create opportunities for reconciliation are implemented as part 
of the transitional justice process. 



● The Truth Commission’s recommendations are widely disseminated, and its Follow-Up 
Committee effectively monitors the implementation of the recommendations. 


IR 1.2: Coordination between local and national institutions enhanced. Two of the main 
challenges in improving government response to victims’ rights are ineffective coordination 
between local and national actors and the need for greater clarity on roles and responsibilities 
among institutional stakeholders. The Peace Accords created additional layers of coordination 
between actors, particularly related to the integration of reparations with peace-related initiatives, 
like PDET implementation. These additional layers exacerbated the fact that local and national 
actors have overlapping responsibilities, limited human and financial resources, and 
cumbersome, sometimes contradictory, processes that delay the fulfillment of reparations. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Relevant institutions at the local and national level standardize, streamline, and 
effectively implement victims’ related policies, processes and procedures. 
● Relevant national and local coordination mechanisms respond quickly and appropriately 
to victims’ needs and protect their rights. 


Illustrative Activities for Objective 1: 

● Support national and local level institutions to implement collective reparation plans. 
● Support national and local-level institutions to develop and implement Return Plans for 
Victims. 
● Support the implementation of UBPD regional search plans. 
● Provide technical assistance to local authorities to design and implement PDET initiatives 
aligned with victims’ reparation needs and priorities. 
● Support community-based strategies as part of the reintegration and reincorporation 
routes. 
● Map current coordination processes, identify bottlenecks, and support public actors to 
streamline processes if possible and better coordinate to fulfill their obligations to 
victims. 
● Support the implementation of restorative measures as part of the transitional justice 
process that create reconciliation opportunities. 


 

Objective 2: Victims’ organizations effectively exercise victims’ rights and support 
reconciliation. 

Through the Activity’s support, victims’ organizations will demonstrate effective representation 
of their constituents and participatory spaces will produce impactful results for victims through 
the design, implementation, and monitoring of policies. The GOC and civil society have made 
significant progress in developing citizen participation mechanisms, particularly those related to 
victims’ issues and the territorial transition to peace. With so many organizations seeking a seat 
at the table, the GOC and civil society organizations (CSOs) struggle to identify which victims’ 
groups are relevant and capable of representing their constituents. Through this Activity, 
victims’ organizations will contribute significantly to advance the Victims Law and Chapter 5 of 
the Peace Accords. By doing so, relevant, representative organizations will become visible. By 
making a difference, they will position themselves as the ideal partners for the GOC and other 
CSOs. This Activity will focus on relevant participation mechanisms identified under Objective 


1, particularly those created under the Victims law, the Peace Accords, and the Comprehensive 
Peace System framework. 

IR 2.1: Technical capacity and performance of victims’ organizations 
strengthened. Victims’ organizations, and other organizations that assist victims, must 
demonstrate greater competency and political savviness to advocate for, respond to, and monitor 
regulations and mechanisms established to implement the Peace Accords, like PDETs and the 
effective participation of victims through the Victims’ seats in Congress. These organizations 
have increased their engagement in key issues to protect victims’ rights, but they have limited 
capacity to adapt to an evolving context. Moreover, these organizations need to more effectively 
demonstrate their relevance to stakeholders. Nascent organizations also require support to 
effectively engage in reparations processes and other participation mechanisms. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Victims’ organizations produce concrete results for their constituents. They establish 
clear advocacy agendas, secure new partnerships with the public and private sector, 
integrate youth participation, and advance the Peace Accords and Victims Law, among 
other actions that positively impact victims. 
● Victims’ organizations develop strong networks that allow organizations to exchange 
information across regions, build consensus and consolidate dialogue. 
● Victims’ organizations utilize innovation, connectivity, cooperative or associative 
working models to support long-term sustainability, and improved collective skills to 
advance reparation processes. 


 

IR 2.2: Key participation spaces for victims generate social impact. Victims’ organizations 
agree that it is the quality and impact of their participation in public spaces that matters, not the 
quantity of spaces that exist for participation. Many victims and their organizations think that 
the myriad of victims’ councils, committees and working tables (“mesas de trabajo”) have not 
translated into more inclusive processes, nor that all these spaces have produced concrete 
results. By expending significant time and resources to participate in multiple public spaces, 
victims’ organizations are less likely to have meaningful dialogue with their stakeholders, and 
they have fewer resources needed to achieve results. This, in turn, builds stakeholder distrust in 
public spaces, and can create new conflicts and internal divisions within victims’ 
organizations. As entities like the JEP consolidate their territorial presence, PDET 
implementation accelerates, and Congressional seats for victims are created, the number of 
participation spaces will only increase, and this situation could worsen. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Participation mechanisms at the local level generate positive impact for victims, such as 
through successful advocacy for their needs, better monitoring of implementation of 
policies, and true inclusion of their priorities and needs in policies and programs. 
● Collaboration among participants of prioritized participation mechanisms is maximized 
through greater dialogue, trust, and respect in a way that de-escalates conflicts. 
● CSOs and victims’ organizations effectively monitor the implementation of the Truth 
Commission’s recommendations, navigate the JEP’s complex processes, and partner with 
the UBPD in the search for missing persons. 



● Victims’ organizations productively engage the Victims Unit to respond to victims’ 
rights, including but not limited to the integration of collective reparations in PDET 
plans. 
● Victims knowledgeably participate in the design and implementation of collective 
reparations, in return and relocation plans, and other decision-making spaces that have an 
impact on them. 
● Victims’ organizations have the capacity to assume new roles like engaging with 
Congressional representatives through the assigned seats to victims. 


 

Illustrative Activities for Objective 2: 

● Map existing participation spaces and provide technical assistance to organizations to 
improve participation. 
● Support victims’ organizations to incorporate innovative approaches and connectivity 
solutions. 
● Support participation of CSOs in the development and implementation of collective 
reparation and return plans. 
● Strengthen networking capacities of organizations and cross-regional learning 
processes. 
● Support and work with Transitional Justice Mechanisms to design and implementation of 
community-oriented reparation measures. 


 

Objective 3: Communities are more willing to reconcile and contribute to the nonrepetition 
of conflict. 

This objective will complement actions under Objectives 1 and 2 by strengthening citizens’ 
capacity to support reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts. The Activity will build on previous 
efforts to develop individual citizens’ skills for dialogue, cooperation, and social cohesion. It 
will support community engagement in initiatives intended to nurture reconciliation between 
various actors and throughout Colombian society. Based on lessons learned from past 
programming, this Activity will achieve cooperation and trust between different actors to achieve 
reconciliation. The Activity will also create positive attitudes, behaviors, and social norms in 
support of reconciliation through various means, including and not limited to effective 
communication campaigns. 

IR 3.1: Community capacity to advance truth telling and memory building enhanced. The 
history of conflict in Colombia has deepened community-based differences. Efforts to establish 
the truth have helped communities overcome differences and rebuild their social fabric. Many 
actors, including those in the public and private sectors, are working with conflict-affected 
communities to collectively build memory and truth. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Conflict-affected communities achieve trauma-informed healing through territorial 
processes for memory and truth-telling that contribute to the non-repetition of conflict. 
● Initiatives prioritized under Pillar 8 of the Peace Accords and other reconciliation 
initiatives, as part of the reincorporation process led by ARN and the transitional justice 
mechanisms as described in Objective 1, are effectively implemented in conflict-affected 
communities. 



● Community-based processes for memory and truth-telling are coordinated with regional 
and national efforts, disseminate information, and contribute to a change in narratives and 
de-stigmatization of conflict-affected municipalities. 


 

IR 3.2: Community trust and cooperation increased through economic partnerships. Trust 
and cooperation are fundamental in bridging relationships between stakeholders with different 
interests. Creating trust among different stakeholders is best done by creating opportunities for 
these stakeholders to work together toward a common goal. Past USAID/Colombia 
programming points to shared value and market-led economic activities, including private-public 
partnerships, as a powerful means for fostering cooperation and multi-actor 
partnerships. Economic opportunities provide diverse groups of individuals a platform to 
interact with one another, which facilitates social integration and mutual understanding. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Trust and cooperative relationships between members of conflict-affected communities 
are developed through economic opportunities that engage private sector actors. 
● Market-led and long-term economic opportunities are created that target victim 
employment and entrepreneurship to simultaneously increase incomes and support their 
linkages with other members in communities to promote cooperation and reconciliation. 
● Communities regain public spaces, thereby overcoming fear and strengthening social 
cohesion. 
● Companies develop more inclusive procedures and organizational cultural changes. 
Employees will develop reconciliation skills. Companies will promote more inclusive 
and diverse environments that foster dialogue and promote respect and individual 
empowerment. 


 

IR 3.3: Community pro-social behaviors contribute to reconciliation and peaceful 
coexistence. Individuals need to change their attitudes and behaviors in favor of reconciliation 
and acceptance of others to advance peacebuilding and non-repetition. That said, attitude and 
behavior change is difficult to achieve. It is sensitive to contextual factors and requires longterm 
interventions to be successful. Colombian society is already starting to demonstrate this 
change. Public opinion surveys show that Colombian citizens’ acceptance of former combatants 
as neighbors went from 51 percent in 2013, to 71 percent in 2018. Far-reaching communication 
and outreach efforts are needed to further address low levels of trust within communities and 
towards state and private sector actors. 

Expected results under this IR include: 

● Attitude and behavioral changes spur community-wide dialogue and create positive 
dynamics for reconciliation. 
● Leverage points and tailored outreach efforts target specific population groups, like 
youth, to make messages culturally appropriate and relevant. 
● Stakeholders transform their negative social perceptions of victims and conflict-affected 
communities and promote a culture of peace and reconciliation. 


Illustrative Activities for Objective 3: 

● Develop community-driven, inclusive conflict resolution training and tools. 



● Support community-led initiatives to equitably regain public spaces and sustain safe 
places for community development actions. 
● Establish public-private partnerships that enable trust-building and cohesion 
● Support territorial processes to build memory and contribute to truth-telling. 
● Develop social behavior change communication (SBCC) strategies to generate positive 
behavioral changes and foster reconciliation. 
● Develop evidence-based communications strategy with a trauma-sensitive approach that 
will create behavioral changes and increase trust and dialogue. 
6. TARGETED GEOGRAPHY 


Restoring Our Future will be implemented in urban and rural centers located in regions with 
conflict affected communities that are aligned with USAID/Colombia’s geographic priorities. 
The Applicant is expected to propose its geographic scope that includes at least 25 
municipalities. The Applicant must select the geography based on the following criteria and 
justify the selection: 

● Municipalities with large populations of victims and where collective reparation and 
return plans have been developed or are in process of implementation; 
● The Colombian Government’s “peace geography” as laid out in its Territorial Focused 
Development Plans, or PDETs, since 30 percent of victims are located in these regions; 
● Municipalities and communities where community reintegration and reincorporation 
strategies will benefit communities receiving former combatants, advancing mitigation of 
existing conflicts, and preventing new forms of violence. 
● Municipalities with ethnic collective territories, given 65 percent of collective reparation 
subjects are Afro-Colombian or Indigenous peoples; 
● Major cities will be included in this activity’s geography because close to 26 percent of 
registered victims live in large urban and peri-urban areas; 
● Presence of victims’ organizations and civil society organizations working with victims; 
● Work done at the policy level and as part of the communication component can take 
place nationally and regionally; 
● Promote regional dynamics, support the implementation of USAID’s regional integration 
strategy (RIS), and the creation and strengthening of territorial networks; and 
● Municipalities connected with markets or with economic corridors that allow potential 
public-private partnerships. 
7. SUBAWARD FUND 


Restoring Our Future is committed to self-reliance. Sustainability relies on the capacity and 
commitment of a country and its communities to plan, finance, and implement their own 
solutions to development challenges. To advance this goal, this Activity will build victims 
organizations’ capacity and performance and support locally led reconciliation efforts. Core to 
that, the Activity will include a minimum $15 million subaward fund that will prioritize local 


organizations. Subawards will be issued through competitive and direct processes. 


8. GUIDING PRINCIPLES 


Inclusive development: The Activity will recognize and address the diverse needs and will place 
an emphasis of specially disenfranchised populations such as ethnic communities, women, youth, 
LGBTI, people with disabilities, and populations severely affected by violence. This approach 
must be integrated throughout all objectives. 

Given the significant number of victims that have declared having physical and psychological 
disabilities, the Activity needs to have a differentiated approach and strategy to integrate them into 
all initiatives. It will need to design specific actions that will promote their empowerment and 
assistance by responsible institutions and organizations. 

The awardee will be expected to develop a Gender and Inclusion Strategy detailing how the 
activity will implement an intersectional inclusive development approach throughout activity 
implementation, including in the inception phase and in monitoring, evaluation, and learning. 

“Do no harm” approach: The Applicant/recipient will be intentional about identifying and 
recognizing risks of harm, among beneficiaries and its own staff, as well as to be intentional, 
proactive, and preventive in mitigating and responding to risks. Within this framework, 
communication strategies and other work must cautiously select language that is inclusive and 
trauma-sensitive to potential psychosocial impacts. 

Positive Youth Development (PYD) approach: Aligned with USAID’s Positive Youth 
Development Framework, Restoring Our Future will proactively develop youth’s social, personal, 
and technical skills. It will foster healthy relationships and support youth to become meaningful 
participants in the development of their communities and contribute to reconciliation and 
sustainable peace. By working with youth as leaders, Restoring Our Future will create a positive 
enabling environment for vulnerable youth, with a special focus on victims. Youth will become 
positive change agents ready to contribute to the social, economic, and political development of 
Colombia, helping their communities and countries achieve self-reliance. 

Trauma-informed approach: A trauma-informed approach includes an understanding of 
trauma and an awareness of the impact it can have across settings, services, and 
populations. Trauma-informed approach is responsive to the impact of trauma, emphasizing 
physical, psychological, and emotional safety for both providers and survivors. Three key 
elements of this approach include: 1) realizing the prevalence of trauma; 2) recognizing how 
trauma affects all individuals involved with the program, organization, or system, including its 
own workforce; and 3) responding by putting this knowledge into practice. 

Private Sector Engagement (PSE): USAID defines PSE as a strategic approach to planning and 
programming through which the Activity consults, strategizes, aligns, collaborates, and 
implements with the private sector for greater scale, sustainability, and effectiveness of 
development. The PSE umbrella concept includes Public-private partnerships (PPPs). USAID 
understands PPPs as an agreement or contract between USAID and a private-sector entity, or 
entities, in which both parties contribute resources. Private sector partners bring special resources, 
expertise, technologies, capabilities, networks and other resources to the table that can augment 
the impact of USAID interventions when strategically aligned. Private sector engagement 


throughout the Activity is key for designing market-driven solutions and coalitions for change that 
will be sustainable beyond the life of the Activity, and thus will contribute to Colombia's journey 
to self-reliance. Strategic long-lasting engagement with the private sector must be identified 
throughout the Activity’s objectives, and applications should identify specific private sector 
partners who will accompany the project throughout implementation. USAID/Colombia envisions 
that the Activity will use PSE indicators. 

Emerging needs: USAID/Colombia recognizes that sustainable development requires flexibility 
to respond to specific emerging circumstances/needs. Within the terms of the scope and 
objectives of the resulting award, and in the case of unforeseen events, the recipient may provide 
assistance to targeted populations in need and located in the geographic areas covered by this 
Activity. For these purposes and after consulting with the AOR and AO, the successful applicant 
may provide assistance using USAID funds through the implementation of planned activities that 
would need to consider the effect of the unforeseen event through minor modifications or 
revisions to the recipient’s implementation plan. The potential recipient may, however, use non- 
USAID funds to support the relief effort in other ways. 

Harness innovation: Innovation can come in different forms. It may include technological 
innovations but can also take the form of new creative approaches or new intervention ideas for 
piloting and testing. Restoring Our Future will innovate, test, and learn from new models 
wherever possible. The Activity also will encourage and seek out positive deviance and 
innovation from the communities themselves as their ability to problem-solve will be key for 
their journey to self-reliance. Restoring Our Future will also utilize innovative technology, 
including connectivity solutions, throughout its programming as a sustainable means to 
achieving objectives. Prudent risk-taking is important to ensure that the Activity has impact in 
the prioritized regions and beyond. 

Local Systems Approach: The focus on local systems is rooted in the reality that achieving and 
sustaining any development outcome depends on the contributions of multiple and 
interconnected actors. Building the capacity of a single actor or strengthening a single 
relationship is insufficient. Rather, the focus must be on the system as a whole: the actors, their 
interrelationships and the incentives that guide them. Since Colombia is a complex, multidimensional, 
and fluid operating environment, it will be critical to analyze and plan all 
interventions based on a deep understanding of the various components of the systems in which 
they will work, as well as how they interact, impact each other, and produce 
effects. Programming must seek to approach elements in the system that can create positive 
catalytic effects that sustain and expand naturally after the life of the Activity, not just looking at 
the roles of different actors. 

Windows of Opportunity: Annual work plans and specific initiatives shall be flexible and allow 
for responding to windows of opportunity. Grounded in the political economy of target 
geographies, the Recipient shall recognize when there are windows of opportunity and moments 
of political and social change when processes or reforms are more likely to take root. In such 
cases, work plans, sub-grant allocation, geographic focus, and other tools can and should be 
altered in response, and these changes are to be agreed upon in writing between USAID and the 
Recipient. Alterations to the work plan, and other documents must not hold the USG to 
incurring costs above the approved budget total. 


Local ownership and leadership: Local ownership and leadership should underpin all Activity 
engagements with GOC actors at the national and local level (particularly municipal authorities), 
civil society, the private sector, and other Colombian stakeholders. Locally led programming is 
more context relevant, tailored, and sustainable and empowers local stakeholders on their 
journey to self-reliance. This Activity is expected to apply a participatory and facilitative 
approach throughout the program cycle, particularly during the inception period, to garner local 
leadership and ownership. The Activity will place a premium on investing in relationships and 
playing a behind-the-scenes role in strengthening ongoing GOC, private sector, and civil society 
platforms, as well as other donor-supported efforts. 

9. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Inception Phase 

Achieving outcomes will be a process of problem-driven, iterative learning and adapting. The 
first five (5) months of the Activity, beginning at the signing of the cooperative agreement, will 
serve as an inception phase, allowing time for the Recipient to: 

1. Identify and analyze existing initiatives and institutions (public, private, informal, 
ongoing USG and non-USG projects, beneficiary groups of other interventions) that 
could be utilized or supported to successfully achieve program goals and objectives; 
2. Map and develop alliances with stakeholders in the field (government, private sector, 
NGOs, community committees, etc.) to start to follow their lead and ensure their 
ownership of activities; 
3. Identify potential local partners’ absorptive capacity for assistance; 
4. Identify opportunities to build capacity for sustainability; 
5. Conduct a holistic assessment of cultural and gender norms, and how these impact 
women, LGBTI, youth, ethnic groups, their families and their communities; 
6. Deepen the Recipient’s understanding of on-the-ground conditions, factors impacting 
different risk levels, and the political economy, including (dis)incentives for change and 
potential windows of opportunity for achieving results; 
7. Ground truth programming approaches (e.g. differentiated/tailored programming by 
population group), test and update critical assumptions, and refine the theory of change; 
8. Confirm the geographic focus and/or propose justified adjustments; 
9. Identify strategic entry points for engagement; 
10. As applicable, gather baseline information; 
11. Begin testing initial approaches in agile micro-pilots that build in explicit processes of 
iterative design and adaptation; and 
12. Establish information systems and adaptive management mechanisms; 


Findings from the inception period will be shared with USAID. The successful applicant and the 
AOR will jointly define the format and timing of this presentation. 


Coordination with other USAID Activities 

Restoring Our Future builds upon previous and ongoing USAID assistance provided to the GOC, 
local organizations, and the private sector to advance the protection of victims’ rights, their 
reparation process, and the promotion of reconciliation opportunities. Other USAID technical 
offices implementing activities may overlap in terms of territory and 
objectives. USAID/Colombia has developed a Regional Integration Strategy (RIS) that aims at 
promoting collaboration and joint work from activities that overlap and have shared geographic 
scopes. Restoring Our Future as well as the Mission’s CDCS objectives will benefit and 
contribute to synergies of other USAID funded programs that are operating in the same 
municipalities and/or have complementary objectives at the national level. 

To facilitate the collaborative process, the Activity will: 

● Proactively seek opportunities for joint strategic programming that amplifies results; 
● Describe joint activities in work plans that clarify roles and responsibilities around 
specific programmatic linkages and common objectives and indicators; 
● Implement strategies and actions prioritized in USAID’s RIS; 
● Conduct joint site visits, when appropriate, to facilitate learning across activities; 
● Actively participate in USAID partner meetings and learning events; 
● Include a section in quarterly and annual reports on collaborative activities and synergies; 
and 
● Develop and contribute to joint indicators to measure effective collaboration and shared 
impacts. 


A continuum of additional USG cooperation and collaboration opportunities could include 
regular meetings between Chiefs of Party and regional Activity staff; ‘speed dating’ events to 
identify cross-project partnering opportunities; joint work planning; trainings; field visits and 
peer learning events; co-location of offices; and pooling resources with other USG activities, 
among others. 

Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) Approach 

The Applicant/awardee is expected to contribute to USAID’s (CLA) approach to 
development. The CLA approach is based on the understanding that development efforts yield 
more effective results if they are coordinated and collaborative; test promising, new approaches 
in a continuous yet also rapid, targeted search for generating improvements and efficiencies; and 
build on what works and eliminate what doesn’t. CLA takes into account programmatic learning 
and shifts generated by the Activity (outward generating), as well as those adopted by the 
Activity from external learning sources. USAID/Colombia also anticipates that a strong focus on 
adaptive management techniques as expressed through staffing skills, structure and culture, 
business processes, and stakeholder engagement will be particularly important in the 
implementation of this Activity, in order to track and adjust to the opportunities to operationally 
integrate with other activities working in related efforts. 


Thus, USAID anticipates a CLA approach that tailors CLA to the needs and opportunities of this 
Activity, while leaving open options for future evolution in its interpretation and application. 

Collaborating: Engage in active collaboration with other key in-country partners to share 
knowledge around assessments, emerging research, lessons learned, and evaluations, and jointly 
develop action plans for integrating learning resulting from these activities into improved 
program implementation. This principle is particularly important when addressing USAID’s RIS 
and coordination efforts. 

Learning: Identify promising practices, work collaboratively to overcome implementation 
obstacles, and address changing conditions. Results will be used to inform upcoming year work 
plans and activity design across multiple stakeholders, captured and shared broadly. Specifically 
define how innovative and dynamic learning agendas will be developed and implemented. 
Identify learning questions to guide the gathering of information to better understand or 
challenge key programmatic assumptions. 

Adapting: Engage in periodic reflection activities with key stakeholders, including actors in 
youth’s socio-ecological systems, to identify, capture, and act upon lessons learned in technical, 
cross-cutting, and management activities. The Applicant/awardee will demonstrate adaptability 
that is informed by knowledge gained through learning and recognize behaviors and incentives 
necessary to create change. Knowledge gained through learning will influence decision making, 
resource allocation, and adaptation to contextual shifts. Application of new knowledge to 
implementation decisions will be reflected in the Annual work plan, and the Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP). 

Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) 

Specific interventions applied by the Activity will be driven not just by opportunity, but also by 
empirical and qualitative evidence. The Recipient must integrate previous activities’ evaluations 
and a baseline diagnostic for the Activity which reflects the elements of the development 
hypothesis with realistic expectations of the value and scale of results and understanding of 
implementation risks. Further, the Recipient must develop and administer flexible monitoring 
tools where country program goals and objectives may change, baselines and control groups may 
be lacking, cause and effect do not always follow a linear relationship, and programs rely on 
quick turnaround of data and analysis to inform programming decisions. Finally, the Recipient 
will cooperate with and facilitate the work of an independent Contractor who will design and 
implement an evaluability assessment to determine whether the Activity will undergo an impact 
or performance evaluation, in accordance with USAID policy. Results of such assessments will 
then be incorporated into the evaluation strategy and the Recipient is also expected to collaborate 
with the evaluation agreed upon with USAID. 

Given the complexity of the issues that this Activity will address, the Recipient will include 
specific strategies and actions of USAID’s complexity aware monitoring and evaluation strategy. 

The Applicant must submit as part of its proposal a monitoring, evaluation and learning plan to 
describe how it will measure starting points, progress and results achieved in reaching the expected 
outcomes of the Activity. The plan should also include key learning questions and how the activity 
learning will contribute to USAID learning agendas. 

Co-creation Throughout Implementation 


As per USAID’s Discussion Note: Co-Creation Additional Help included as an Annex 30 to this 
NOFO, “co-creation” is a technique that brings people together to collectively produce a mutually 
valued outcome using a participatory process, which can be used at various points throughout the 
Program Cycle. 

Based on findings from the inception phase, the Recipient will engage with USAID and other 
relevant stakeholders in co-creation to finalize the adjusted Activity Description, which will be 
subject to the AOR’s and AO’s final approval and reflected in an award modification if needed. 
Co-creation with USAID will also take place during the preparation, revision and finalization of 
the Activity’s Annual Implementation Plans and AMELP. 

Co-creation may take various forms, but USAID anticipates in-person oral discussions and 
strategic review sessions with relevant Activity team members, consultations with other USAID 
specialists and activities, and key stakeholders, among others. 

Communications and Outreach 

The Activity must enhance USAID’s outreach and communications efforts in three dimensions: 

The first dimension is outreach to Colombian and other audiences. This effort will focus on 
describing and explaining USAID’s efforts to assist Colombian partners to achieve the objectives 
established above. This includes but is not limited to: 

● Preparing and sharing (with USAID) updated fact sheets on a quarterly basis. 
● Preparing and sharing infographics and other innovative communications pieces and/or 
channels of communication with USAID and other audiences. 
● Preparing and including at least one success story, following USAID guidance, 
describing the impact of the program in each quarterly technical report. Such stories can 
be as short as half-page and not longer than one page. 


The second dimension is to advance the Activity’s programmatic objectives through effective 
communications. Toward this end, the Communication and Outreach Plan will include an indepth 
strategic considerations section providing an analysis of the internal and/or external 
environment, a set of project and communication objectives, key audiences (both primary and 
secondary), key messages, implementation plan, budget, and evaluation framework. Special 
considerations and specific actions towards behavioral changes need to be incorporated in the 
Communications and Outreach Plan to consistently advance inclusive reconciliation and social 
cohesion efforts. 

The third dimension is to contribute to knowledge management, including through close 
coordination with the AMELP. The Communications and Outreach Plan will need to 
strategically be aligned with the AMELP in order to ensure effective knowledge management. 


10. RESOURCES 
● USAID Youth in Development Policy 
● USAID Private Sector Engagement Policy 
● USAID Economic Growth Policy 
● Gender Integration in Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance (DRG) 



● USAID Digital Strategy 
● USAID Policy on Promoting the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (PRO-IP) 
● USAID Complexity-Aware Monitoring Discussion Note 
● Assessment - Challenges of Reconciliation and Reparation for Victims in Colombia - Final 
Report 
● USAID/Colombia Regional Integration Strategy 


 

[END OF SECTION A] 


1. ESTIMATE OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 
2. START DATE AND PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE FOR FEDERAL AWARDS 
3. SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 





SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 


USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this NOFO. Subject to 
funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to provide up to $70 
million in total USAID funding over a five-year period. 

 


The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. 

 


USAID will be substantially involved in this Cooperative Agreement to help the Recipient achieve 
the agreement objectives in the following manner: 

3.1 Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plans: The Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR) will approve the Recipient's annual implementation plans (AIP) and any 
subsequent changes to the plans due to shifting context, new information, security conditions, etc. 
The AOR will participate in strategic planning sessions for the development of AIPs. The AOR 
must review the agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure inadvertent changes to them are not 
approved through the AIP. 

 

3.2 Approval of Key Personnel and Any Changes in Key Personnel: Key personnel are 
those individuals considered to be essential to the successful implementation of the award. USAID 
will be consulted early in the process of any proposed changes in key personnel following award, 
and the AO will approve the selection after AOR concurrence. Key personnel identified for this 
award will be identified and included prior to award, if applicable. 

 


3.3 Collaboration and joint participation: The Agency and Recipient engagement in 
collaboration and joint participation may occur when the Recipient’s successful accomplishment 
of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical knowledge. USAID anticipates 
collaboration and joint participation during the inception phase and co-creation throughout award 
implementation. Additional areas and spaces for joint participation and collaboration may be 
identified throughout the life of the Activity. Additionally, if the Activity establishes an advisory 
committee that provides advice to the Recipient, USAID may participate as a member of this 
committee as well. Advisory committees will only deal with programmatic or technical issues, and 
not routine administrative matters. 

 



4. ADMINISTRATIVE AND TECHNICAL INVOLVEMENT 





3.4 Approval of all sub-awards: 2 CFR 200.308 requires the Recipient to obtain USAID’s prior 
approval for the subaward, transfer or contracting out of any work under the agreement. Subawards 
included in the final revised application and budget are considered approved unless otherwise 
noted at the time of award. 


3.5 Approval of the Activity Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP): The AOR 
will review and approve the AMELP and all subsequent changes to it. 


3.6 Approval of one stage of work. The Agency’s review and approval of one stage of work, 
before work can begin on a subsequent stage during the period covered by the cooperative 
agreement. This includes the Inception Phase detailed in Section A. Additional stages may be 
identified depending on the technical approach of the apparently successful Applicant and included 
in this section prior to award or outlined during implementation as part of the Annual 
Implementation Plan. 

 

3.7 Approval of print or electronic publications: The AOR will review--with the 
Development Outreach & Communications (DOC) Specialist--and approve final versions of all 
communications materials, including printed and/or electronic publications, before these are 
released to ensure compliance with approved Activity specifications. 

 

3.8 Approval for direction or redirection: The AOR will authorize specific kinds of 
direction or redirection because of interrelationships with other Activities sponsored by the U.S. 
Government or other donors and to ensure coordination and complementarity, avoid duplication 
of efforts, and/or support U.S. foreign policy considerations. All such direction or redirection must 
be within the program description, budget, and other terms and conditions of the award. 

 

3.9 Approval of humanitarian assistance activities: Humanitarian assistance activities to 
preserve activity impact or assist target populations impacted by disasters may be implemented on 
an as needed basis and are not bound by the geographic focus; rather, activities are subject to prior 
written approval by the AO. 

 

3.10 Construction: No form of construction, including small scale infrastructure, is allowable 
without express, prior written consent by the AO. The AOR does not have authority to authorize 
such activities or to commit USAID funds to these activities. The Recipient has an affirmative 
duty in ensuring it is not using USAID funds for any activity that is considered construction under 
USAID policies. Any USAID funds used for these purposes are unallowable without prior written 
AO consent. No retroactive consent will be given under any circumstances. 

 

The following factors applicable to both grants and cooperative agreements are not 
considered substantial involvement during performance and include the following: 

1. Agency approval of recipient plans prior to award; 
2. Normal exercise of Federal stewardship responsibilities during the project period 
such as site visits, performance reporting, financial reporting, and audit to ensure 
the recipient accomplishes the objectives, terms, and conditions of the award; 



3. Unanticipated Agency involvement to correct deficiencies in project or 
financial performance from the terms of the assistance instrument; 
4. General statutory requirements understood in advance of the award, such as 
civil rights, environmental protection, and provision for the handicapped; 
5. Agency review of performance after completion; and 
6. General administrative requirements, such as those included in 2 CFR 200. 


Also, the Agency may provide technical assistance, guidance, or advice to the recipient 
during the period of the award to enhance collaboration or engagement with the 
recipient. Such technical assistance, guidance, or advice is not considered substantial 
involvement when: 

7. USAID provides it at the request of the recipient; 
8. The recipient is not required to follow it; or 
9. The recipient is required to follow it, but USAID provides it prior to the start of the 
award, and the recipient understands this prior to the award of the instrument, for 
example, when more-frequent reporting is required, as allowed by 2 CFR 200.327 and 2 
CFR 200.328 . 
5. AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 
6. NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 





 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937. 
Code 937 is defined as the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other 
than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient under the subject program is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Restoring our Future 
Activity, which is authorized by Federal statute. The Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award 
through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility 
for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program 
objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

 
[END OF SECTION B] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 


1. ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 

Eligibility for this RFA is not restricted. U.S. and non-US organizations may participate under 
this RFA. Public International Organizations (PIOs), as defined by ADS 308, are eligible to 
submit an application. Any PIO that submits an application to this RFA is agreeing to have all 
substantial involvement clauses (See Section B.3) included as special conditions in their final PIO 
cost-type agreement (See ADS 308.3.2.2 and ADS 308.3.9.1) or is otherwise ineligible for award. 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is required 
to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to 
obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. 

For-profit applicants must note that USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit for recipients 
under assistance instruments. Forgone profit does not qualify as cost-share or leverage. 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

2. COST SHARING OR MATCHING 

This activity will require a cost share of $11,000,000.00 from interested applicants. The cost share 
requirement will strengthen local ownership of the program and sustainability of results. Colombia 
is a middle-income country with a vibrant private sector already partnering with USAID under 
numerous Global Development Alliances, and this new activity intends to even further strengthen 
private and public sector engagement. 

 


3. NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS 

An applicant may submit only one application per organization; no individual investigator/ 
program director applications will be accepted. 

 

 
[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. AGENCY POINTS OF CONTACT 

 

Name: Mr. William Sedlak 

Title: Agreement Officer 

 

Name: Mr. Elkin Romero 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: elromero@usaid.gov 

 


2. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

All questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the e-mail addresses above 
not later than the time indicated on the cover letter. Any information given to a prospective 
Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as 
an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the 
lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. GENERAL CONTENT AND FORM OF THE CONCEPT PAPER AND 
APPLICATION 

This is a two-tiered RFA in accordance with ADS 303.3.6.1(c). Selection under this RFA will be 
based on a two-step process: 

● Phase 1 - Concept Paper submissions: open to all eligible organizations as described 
in this RFA. 


 

● Phase 2 - Full application submissions: by invitation only to Applicants selected under 
Phase 1 evaluation. 


Applicants must first submit a concept paper for review. All concept papers will be evaluated 
according to the criteria specified in this NOFO. If the concept is determined to warrant further 
evaluation per the selection criteria established, full applications will be requested. 

Applications must comply with the following: 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman font, 
1” margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including 
consecutive page numbers, date of submission, and Applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs, tables, and charts. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 



● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the Applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do 
so may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

3.1 Phase 1 - Concept Paper – Open to all eligible organizations as described in this RFA 


1. Submission Instructions 


Concept papers must be submitted electronically via email to Mr. William Sedlak and Mr. 
Elkin Romero at the following email address: elromero@usaid.gov. Email submissions 
must include the following information in the subject line: 

“RFA 72051422RFA00001 – [name of organization] - Concept Paper” 

2. Contents and Form 
2.1 Applicant Information (1 page - not counted against the page limit) 





Concept Papers must not exceed five (5) pages in total. Applicants are advised that any 
pages exceeding these limits will not be considered for evaluation. Concept papers must 
be submitted in PDF format in one single file. 

This section must include the following information: 

a. Activity title; 
b. RFA number; 
c. Name of organization (s) applying (lead or primary Applicant) for the 
agreement; 
d. Any partnerships and/or proposed sub-awardees; 
e. Contact person, telephone number, email, address.. 
2.2 Case Study (up to 3 pages) 





Applicants must present a case study that reflects how the proposed technical 
approach will achieve the program objectives. The case study must include 
illustrative activities that the Applicant would undertake to incorporate the 
different activity elements included in the Program Description (Section A). 
Applicants will choose one municipality or region that complies with criteria 
described in Section A to develop its case study. 

The concept paper must briefly describe the following: 


a. An understanding of victims’ issues and the necessary elements to 
advance reconciliation in the Colombian context. 
b. Technical approach to achieve the project’s three objectives. 
c. A systems approach that includes local actors and that evidences the links 
between creating an enabling environment for reconciliation and protecting 
victims’ rights. 



2.3 Management Approach (up to 1.5 pages) 
2.4 Relevant experience and capacity to implement (up to 0.5 pages) 





The Applicant must describe the management structure and approach to achieve 
the results in the Program Description, including the implementation of the subawards 
component and an organizational chart showing the proposed central and 
regional structure. 

The Applicant must provide three examples of your organizations’ most recent 
projects, or projects most relevant to your concept paper, including the title of the 
project, the dates, the total funding, the donor (if any), and a brief description. 

 

3.2 Phase 2 - Full Application - Open only to organizations selected in Phase 1 

 

3.2.1 Full Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO from organizations invited to this stage must be 
submitted no later than the closing date and time indicated in the subsequent letter from 
USAID requesting a full application. Late applications may be considered at the discretion 
of the Agreement Officer. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of 
system generated documentation of delivery receipt date and time. It is the Applicant’s 
responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and received by 
USAID/Colombia on time. Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and 
in some cases delays of several hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, 
applicants are requested to send the application in sufficient time ahead of the 
deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government infrastructure is the 
USAID mail server. 

 

Full Applications must be submitted in two separate parts: (a) Technical Application and 
(b) Business/Cost Application. Please indicate in the subject line of the email whether the 
email is related to the technical, cost application or presentation, and the desired sequence 
of multiple emails (if more than one is sent) and of attachments (e.g. “No. 1 of 4”). 

 

For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email will have 
a subject line which says: "[RFA 72051422RFA00001, [organization name], Cost 
Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

All applications received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness 
to the NOFO and the application format. No additions or modifications will be accepted 
after the submission date. 

 

After the application has been sent electronically, immediately check your own email to 
confirm that the attachments that were intended to be sent were included. If an error is 
discovered in the transmission, please send the material again. Do not send the same email 
more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a “corrected” 
email. 

 


3.2.2 Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application must be specific, complete, and concise. The application must 
demonstrate a clear understanding of the work to be undertaken, the responsibilities of all 
parties involved, offer critical thinking and analysis for each component, demonstrate how 
the programmatic approach and operational principles will be implemented, and tie the 
technical approach to Expected Results to be achieved. The application must take into 
account the requirements of the Activity and merit review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The entire technical application must not exceed 25 pages and must include the following 
sections. All pages except for Key Personnel Resumes and References (Section D.3.2.2.f) 
and Key Personnel Letters of Commitment (Section D.3.2.2.g) will be counted against the 
25-page limit. 

 
Cover Page (see Section D.3.2.2.1) 

a. Table of contents (one-page listing all page numbers and annexes) 
b. Acronym List (one page maximum) 
c. Technical Strategy (See Section D.3.2.2.2) 
d. Management, Staffing Plan and Key Personnel (See Section 3.2.2.3) 
e. Resumes and References for 5 Key Personnel (2 pages maximum for each key 
personnel position-see Section D.3.2.2.3.b.ii) 
f. Key Personnel Letters of Commitment (1 page each-see Section D.3.2.2.3.b.iii) 


 3.2.2.1 Cover Page (one page maximum) 

 The Cover Page must include the following information 

a. Activity title 
b. RFA number 
c. Name of organization (s) applying (lead or primary Applicant) for the agreement 
d. Any partnerships and/or proposed sub-awardees 
e. Contact person, telephone number, fax number, address, and types name(s) 
and title(s) of person(s) who prepared the application, and corresponding signatures. 


 

 3.2.2.2 Technical Strategy (15 pages maximum) 

The technical strategy must provide a clear and succinct overview of the 
Applicant’s proposed plan for achieving the objectives and results outlined in the 
Program Description and Results Framework, adhering to the programmatic 
approach, guiding principles, and other considerations as described in Section A. 
The technical strategy must display coordination, integration, and 
complementarity among all its components. 

The Applicant must demonstrate clearly how the Objectives and Results will be 
achieved, and how it will capitalize on previous USAID and other successes in 
Colombia. It must demonstrate a clear understanding of the context and incorporate 
strategies and illustrative activities and indicators that are hallmarked by synergies 
between stakeholders, innovation, feasibility considerations, and a focus on 
generating sustainability beyond the performance period. 


The Applicant must also incorporate a detailed strategy for the active engagement, 
and meaningful participation and co-creation throughout implementation of local 
organizations, especially victims’ organizations. The technical strategy shall also 
specify the Applicant’s anticipated primary local partners and alliances. 

The Applicant must also demonstrate a strategy to engage other relevant 
stakeholders, including sub-national government actors (e.g., governor’s offices, 
mayor’s offices, municipal secretariats), relevant national institutions (e.g., 
Ministry of the Interior, Victims Units, Unit for the Search of Missing Persons, 
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, High Presidential Counselor for Stabilization, etc.), 
civil society organizations and the private sector. This strategy must evidence a 
clear approach to consulting with these stakeholders from the design phase 
onwards and including them in relevant programmatic activities. 

As stated in Program Description (Section 7. Subawards Fund), the Applicant 
must clearly demonstrate the proposed approach to working directly with victims’ 
organizations and other local actors that promote reconciliation and truth-telling 
to strengthen their capacity and support their technical initiatives. 

The Applicant must include the geographic focus proposed based on the Section 
A criteria that shows the current and predicted future need for the intervention, 
added value of the intervention in these areas; and how the Applicant will 
complement and program collaboratively with other development actors and 
projects in these areas. 

The technical strategy must also reflect how the Applicant will respond rapidly to 
the changing context, including emerging needs, evolving crises such as socioeconomic, 
political, and humanitarian emergencies, and natural disasters. It 
should also be appropriate and effective based on political economy 
considerations. 

 

 3.2.2.3 Management, Staffing Plan and Key Personnel (5 pages maximum) 

a. Management and Staffing Plan 

The Applicant must propose a management approach and staffing plan with 
a clear structure and lines of accountability to achieve maximum impact 
with the budget resources provided. The use of local rather than 
international personnel for both permanent and short‐term positions should 
be maximized to assure appropriate institutionalization and sustainability. 
The staffing plan must also evidence diversity and inclusion. 

This section must include a discussion of how the Applicant will manage 
program activities and subawards with local organizations. Additionally, 
the Applicant must include an organizational chart which shows the totality 
of positions proposed for all components, as well as inter-staff relationships, 
the proposed central and regional office structure, and integration of 
consultations into the overall structure. The management plan must clearly 
demonstrate the relationship and structure of the proposed partnerships. 


The Applicant must include as part of the management plan any proposed 
sub-recipients and their respective roles in relation to the program 
objectives. The management plan must include a chart that shows the 
structure, governance, and relationships between the prime and subrecipients. 


As the activity will include grants to local civil society organizations that 
require capacity building, the Applicant must include a brief description of 
how it will support technical and managerial skills-building among the staff 
of local partners and how it intends to measure results achieved in this 
regard. 

b. Key Personnel 

Key personnel include the Chief of Party and a Deputy Chief of Party. The 
Applicant may propose an additional three key personnel positions and the 
respective candidates. The Applicant must propose individuals for the Key 
Personnel positions that are highly qualified to fulfill the responsibilities of 
these roles. This core management team must demonstrate the required 
skills to manage the Activity and interact with high-level GOC officials, 
civil society and victims’ representatives and the private sector at the 
national and subnational levels. 

In addition, the Applicant must have an interdisciplinary team that can work 
vertically and horizontally to achieve Activity objectives (e.g., expertise 
relevant to the Activity’s focus areas stated in the Program Description and 
the Guiding Principles). Proposed Key Personnel must have sufficient 
managerial as well as technical capacity, expertise, and experience to 
effectively manage and support the overall project and its staff. They should 
also have experience and expertise in designing, implementing, and 
evaluating activities similar to those described in the Program Description. 

Applicants are strongly expected to consider the selection of the staff based 
on the possibility of recruiting highly qualified Colombian professionals to 
achieve the objectives set forth. Applicants are strongly encouraged to 
consider gender equality and diversity in their leadership team and overall 
staffing plan. 

This section will describe in narrative format, the roles and 
responsibilities, qualifications, and relevant work experience of the 
proposed Key Personnel. The Applicant must state concisely how the 
proposed individuals are appropriate for supporting effective 
implementation and achieving the program’s objectives. 

For each Key Personnel position, the Applicant must submit the following: 

i.A brief description of the responsibilities of the key personnel position; 
ii.Resumé for the proposed key personnel, with three references with 
telephone numbers and email addresses. USAID reserves the right to 
obtain information on key personnel from any and all sources inside 
or outside the U.S. Government; 



iii.A signed letter from the key personnel indicating his/her availability to 
serve in the stated position. 


 

The Chief of Party (COP) and a Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) must be fluent in 
oral and written English to ensure effective communication with USAID and other 
USG entities, including participation in high level discussions and visits. 

 

3.2.2.4 Illustrative AMELP and CLA Strategy (5 pages maximum) 

The illustrative AMELP will describe the Applicant’s approach to monitoring, 
evaluation, and learning and include specific high-level outcomes linked to 
impact-level results and relevant indicators. The proposed indicators must be 
useful for timely management decisions and credibly reflect the performance of 
the Activity. The Applicant must also include a proposed timeline for MEL actions 
that will enable a timely collection of data, including baselines at relevant outcome 
and output levels. Structured qualitative data gathering, and analysis approaches 
can shed valuable insight on activities and approaches that are not amenable to 
standard performance indicators and linear logic models. If the Applicant proposes 
such data gathering and analysis, it will include a discussion on how they will 
transcend anecdotes and contribute to establishing an evidence base for future 
decisions. 

This Activity is designed to enable iterative, adaptive approaches to achieving 
programmatic objectives guided by system analysis and stakeholder mapping 
during the initial inception phase and informed by ongoing context and political 
economy analysis. The Applicant’s illustrative AMELP must describe its 
approach to Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) in depth. 

In addition to traditional performance-based monitoring and evaluation tools, the 
Activity is expected to employ approaches suitable to non-linear change pathways. 
Applicants are encouraged to include Complexity-Aware Monitoring and 
Evaluation methodologies that will complement traditional monitoring 
mechanisms and enrich the activity’s CLA and MEL approach. 

Ongoing, CLA and context analysis will be embedded in the Activity’s technical 
strategy as well as its management and staffing plan. This will allow Activity staff 
and USAID to closely monitor the political and institutional environment, assess 
emerging and shifting needs, and quickly redirect resources out of areas where 
progress is unlikely to areas where opportunities and challenges arise. The 
Applicant must explain how it will use the AMELP to proactively recommend 
programming adjustments to USAID and is expected to be candid about 
approaches and activities that are not working. 

The AMELP will have a special focus on empowering Colombian partners - both 
within and outside of government - to utilize diverse MEL approaches, and to 
integrate learning into feedback processes that are cyclical and well facilitated. 
The AMELP must also describe how it will be articulated with the 
Communications and Outreach Plan for effective knowledge management. 

 

3.2.3 Business (Cost) Application Format 


The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical 
Application. While no page limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are 
encouraged to be as concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The 
business (cost) application must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the 
budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed 
necessary for the Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 
CFR 200.205. Applicants will not submit any additional information with their initial 
application. 

 

For budgeting purposes, Applicants must use an Exchange Rate of COP $3,500 per US 
dollar. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated 
below this listing with the letters for each requirement) 

 

3.2.3.1 Cover page 

 

The Business/Cost application must include a cover page containing the following 
information: 

a. Activity title; 
b. RFA number; 
c. Name of organization (s) applying (lead or primary Applicant) for the agreement; 
d. Any partnerships and/or proposed sub-awardees; 
e. Contact person, telephone number, fax number, address, and types name(s) and 
title(s) of person(s) who prepared the application, and corresponding signatures. 


 

3.2.3.2 SF 424 Form 

 

The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard 
Forms can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 

Application for Federal 
Assistance (SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 

Budget Information (SF- 
424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 


Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

3.2.3.3 Required Certifications and Assurances 

 

The Applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
full application: 


a. “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” document found 
at http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
b. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
c. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance 
if your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

3.2.3.4 Budget and Budget Narrative 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later 
versions) with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, 
including itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not 
contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the 
cost analysis time required to make an award and may result in a rejection of the cost 
application. 

 

The Budget Narrative must be a written narrative in Word or PDF formats that explains 
individual cost elements and how they were estimated. The narrative must contain 
sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. 

 

The Applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements 
identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be 
thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed 
costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out 
by major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and 
any potential sub-Applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H for 
Summary Budget Template 


 


● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement 
the Applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found 
in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 


 


● Detailed Budgets for each named Sub-Recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, 
broken out by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the 
project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

a. Salary and Allowances - Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include position title, 
salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, 
when proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must 
explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must 
demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the services rendered and 
consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of the Applicant. 
Applicants must provide their established written policies on personnel 
compensation. If the Applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of 
compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale 
used and supporting market research. 


 

b. Fringe Benefits - (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by 
an agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide 
evidence of its approval. If an Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, 
the Applicant must propose a rate and explain how the Applicant determined the rate. 
In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all 
items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, 
expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

c. Travel and Transportation - Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the 
Applicant’s normal travel policies. When appropriate, please provide supporting 
documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain 
assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

d. Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property- 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the 
cost per unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the 
equipment and supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must 
support the necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: 
rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives 
available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

e. Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to 
any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the subtier 
entity is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the 
same requirements as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and 
indirect costs. 



 

f. Inception Phase - The Applicant must incorporate costs associated with the five months 
of inception phase. 


 

g. Co-creation - The Applicant must incorporate costs associated with co-creation 
throughout the life of the Activity. 


 

h. Grants Fund – The GF should be consistent with the Applicant’s technical approach. 
Applicants should note the importance of local partners engagement throughout 
implementation as described in Section A of the NOFO. 


 

i. Knowledge Management - The Applicant must incorporate the estimated cost for 
knowledge management as described in Section A. 


 

j. AMELP - The Applicant must allocate sufficient human and financial resources within 
the budget necessary for successful implementation of the AMELP. 


 

k. Reports – The activity will require various reports throughout the life of the Activity 
as included in section F. The Applicant must allocate sufficient resources to generate 
these reports and to submit them in English language. 


 

l. Security – The Applicant must clearly identify security costs in the budget and budget 
narrative that demonstrates it has undertaken a thoughtful review of their security needs 
to successfully implement the Activity as presented in its technical approach. 


 

m. Environmental Compliance – The Applicant must include enough resources in the 
budget to ensure it can comply with environmental requirements for this Activity. 


 

n. Other Direct Costs - This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as 
report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as 
well as any other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by 
the Applicant. The Applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any 
proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the 
program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

o. Indirect Costs - Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or 
will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see 
Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. The application must identify which approach they are 
requesting and provide the applicable supporting information. Below are the most 
commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 


 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

 

Eligibility: Any Applicant 

 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 


 

Eligibility: Any Applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that 
NICRA 

 

Initial Application Requirements: If the Applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued 
by an Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving 
Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth 
in the award subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide 
for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

 

Eligibility: Any Applicant that has never received a NICRA 

 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect 
or direct costs but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If 
chosen, this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards 
until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the 
non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The Applicant must describe which 
cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further 
information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged as A Fixed Amount 

 

Eligibility: Non-U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but 
approval is at the discretion of the AO 

 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet 
that includes the following: 

 


● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates 
for the current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive 
officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are 
identifiable to more than one program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, 
operations and maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous 
fiscal year and estimates for the current year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across 
all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that 
particular cost to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the Applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 
10% de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may 
request additional supporting information, including financial statements and audits, if 


the application is still under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no 
obligation to approve the Applicant’s requested method. 

 

p. Cost Sharing - The Applicant must include the amount of cost-sharing resources to be 
provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and 
the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants must also provide a 
breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations 
involved in implementing the resulting award. 


 

3.2.3.5 Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any 
requirements for prior approval by the Agency. If the Applicant would like the award to 
reflect approval of any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically 
required for allowability, the Applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 
200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

3.2.3.6 Approval of Subawards 

 

The Applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved 
at the time of award. For each proposed subaward the Applicant must provide the 
following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● UEI Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security 
designation list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the Applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the Applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


3.2.3.7 Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an Applicant unless the Applicant has complied with all 
applicable Unique Entity Identifier (UEI number) and System for Award Management 
(SAM) requirements. Each Applicant (unless the Applicant is an individual or Federal 
awarding agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has 
an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required 
to: 

 

a. Provide a valid UEI number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 



b. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining 
processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating 
hosting to make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.sam.gov). 
c. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all 
times during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under 
consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an Applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine 
that the Applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis 
for making an award to another Applicant. 

 

SAM registration and UEI number: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. Applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a 
Quick Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, 
navigate to Help, then to International Registrants. 

 

3.2.3.8 History of Performance 

 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all 
its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or 
related programs, not to exceed three (3) awards as follows: 

 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award Number; 
● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the Activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the 
work at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current 
contact information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed 
individual. 


This requirement does not apply to sub-applicants. If the Applicant encountered problems 
on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short explanation and the corrective 
action taken. The Applicant should not provide general information on its 
performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
Applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information 
in its review of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and 
conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk 
assessment. 

 

3.2.3.9 Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 


 

Applicants must provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan (BSMP) to be evaluated 
and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting award. The 
template for submission of this document is attached to this NOFO. 

 

The Applicant must submit a draft Branding Strategy and Marking Plan with the Technical 
Application. The proposed BSMP may be revised and modified as needed during the 
inception and/or co-creation periods. It must include all estimated costs associated with the 
branding and marking of the Activity, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events and 
materials, etc. In preparation of the BSMP, the Applicant must use the attached guidance 
and format. 

 

Applicants must briefly describe (not to exceed two pages) how they will promote USAID 
identity, U.S. Government’s support for this Activity and the Activity’s achievements in 
Colombia. It is a Federal statutory and regulatory requirement that all overseas programs, 
projects, activities, public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully 
funds under an assistance award or sub-award must be appropriately marked with the 
USAID identity. 

 

The branding and marking plan must be consistent with USAID’s Branding and Marking 
Policy. USAID’s Agreement Officer will have final approval of the branding strategy and 
marking plan. The branding and marking plan will be included in and made a part of the 
resulting associate cooperative agreement. 

 

Although the Activity has been named Restoring our Future by USAID, the Applicant is 
expected to propose a Spanish name that reflects the Activity’s objective. This may be done 
through the submission of the draft BSMP and will be subject to discussion and approval 
by USAID upon award. 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
"Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and 
positioned, and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country 
citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the Applicant, 
confers no rights to the Applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the Applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The Applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision 
and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 



 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


 

1. All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

2. The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

i. USAID requires the Applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as 
found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless 
Section VI of the RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has 
approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

ii. USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 


 

iii. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the Applicant's 
identity. 


 

iv. If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the Applicant 
must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for 
the program or project. 


 

v. USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo 
to consistently identify this program, the Applicant must attach a copy of the 
proposed logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator 
approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

3. The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

4. Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 

 


i. Describe the main program message. 


 

ii. Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcements, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 


 

iii. Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, 
and so forth. Applicants must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, 
“USAID is from the American People.” 


 


iv. Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 


 

5. Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

6. Any other groups whose logo or identity the Applicant will use on program materials 
and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly 
acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the Applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the Applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
“Marking Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials, and other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises 
of the USAID logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The 
USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency and is found on the USAID Web 
site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the Applicant, confers 
no rights to the Applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the Applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The Applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision 
and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

1. A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials 
that the Applicant plans to produce, and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of 
the award, including: 

 

i. Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature; 



 

ii. Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio-visual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by 
USAID; 


 

iii. Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or 
disaster relief programs; and 


 

iv. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the Applicant's 
identity. 


 

v. Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If 
the USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the Recipient is encouraged to 
otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 


 

2. A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

i. The program deliverables that the Applicant plans to mark with the USAID 
identity; 


 

ii. The type of marking and what materials the Applicant will use to mark the 
program deliverables; 


 

iii. When in the performance period the Applicant will mark the program 
deliverables, and where the Applicant will place the marking; 


 

iv. What program deliverables the Applicant does not plan to mark with the 
USAID identity , and 


 

v. The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 


 

3. Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an 
explanation of why the exemption would apply. The Applicant may request an 
exemption if USAID marking requirements would: 

i.Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and 
materials. The Applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim 
Result, or program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an 
aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable 
item, examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 


 

ii. Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The 



Applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as 
credible. 


 

iii. Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or 
audits, public service announcements, or other communications. The Applicant 
must explain why each particular item or product is better positioned as hostcountry 
government item or product. 


 

iv. Impair the functionality of an item. The Applicant must explain how marking 
the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 


 

v. Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The Applicant must explain why 
marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 


 

vi. Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The 
Applicant must identify the relevant norm and explain why marking would 
violate that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 


 

vii. Conflict with international law. The Applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 


 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness 
and will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be 
reviewed to ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with 
the stated objectives of the award, the Applicant's cost data submissions, and the 
performance plan. 


 

g. If the Applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any 
approved exemptions, will be included in, and made part of the resulting grant or 
cooperative agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided 
otherwise. 


 

3.2.3.10 Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for Recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 
for assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and 
services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized 
geographic code specified in Section B.5 of this NOFO and must meet the source and 
nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 


 

3.2.3.11 Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 

 

1. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

a. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an Applicant organization 
or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved 
in the competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency 
official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which 
financial or other personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of 
compromising, the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or Recipient 
employee. 

 


b. The Applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
If the Applicant discovers a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the Applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later 
than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 


 

2. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The Applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that 
they are aware of that may provide the Applicant with an unfair competitive 
advantage in competing for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair 
competitive advantage include but are not limited to situations in which an Applicant 
or the Applicant’s employee gained access to non-public information regarding a 
federal assistance funding opportunity, or an Applicant or Applicant’s employee was 
substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. 
USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the Applicant. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. CRITERIA 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant 
matters which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard 
against which all applications will be evaluated. 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here, and 
prescribed by the Concept Paper/Technical Application Format. The Concept Papers and 
Technical Applications will be scored by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria 
described in this section. 

 

2. TECHNICAL REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 

This is a multi-tiered RFA in accordance with ADS 303.3.6.1(c). Selection under this RFA 
will be based on a two-step process: 

● Phase 1 - Concept Paper submissions: open to all eligible organizations as 
described in this NOFO. Concept papers will receive a PASS or FAIL rating 
depending on the results of the evaluation process according to the merit 
review criteria outlined below for this stage. Applicants who are not invited to 
proceed to Phase 2 will be notified. 


 

● Phase 2 - Full application submissions: by invitation only to applicants 
selected under Phase 1 evaluation. 


Applicants must first submit a concept paper for review. All concept papers will be 
evaluated according to the criteria specified in this RFA. If the concept is determined to 
warrant further evaluation per the selection criteria established, USAID will request a 
full application. In accordance with ADS 303.3.10.2 and 2 CFR 200.306, cost sharing 
will be used to break ties among full applications with equivalent scores after evaluation 
against all other factors. 

 

2.1 Merit Review Phase 1 - Concept Paper – Open to all eligible organizations 

 

The concept papers will be evaluated based on the following criterion: 

 

Through the case study, USAID will review the Applicant’s understanding of victims’ 
issues, the necessary elements to advance reconciliation in the Colombian context and 
how the proposed strategy, illustrative activities and key stakeholders incorporate the 
different elements of the Program Description in a feasible way to achieve the overall 
objective in the municipality/region selected. Concept papers must demonstrate a 
systems approach that includes local actors and that evidences the links between 
creating an enabling environment for reconciliation and protecting victims’ rights. 
Additionally, USAID will review the applicants’ proposed management structure and 
approach to achieve the results including how the sub-awards component will be 
implemented and the proposed organizational chart showing the central and regional 


structure. Also, it will evaluate the relevance of the projects implemented as it relates 
to the concept paper. 

 

2.2 Merit Review Phase 2 - Full Application – Open only to organizations selected in 
Phase 1 

 

USAID will conduct merit reviews of all full applications from organizations invited from Phase 
1 that comply with all requirements and instructions in this NOFO. Applications will be 
reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the criteria below, listed in descending order of 
importance. Applications will be scored using an adjectival evaluation scale (exceptional, very 
good, satisfactory, marginal, and unsatisfactory). 

 

Evaluation Criteria #1 – Technical Strategy 

The technical strategy shall be evaluated based on the extent to which: 

a. Is clear, technically sound, feasible, responsive to the program description contained in 
Section A and is likely to meet the Activity’s objectives and Intermediate Results. 
b. Demonstrates an understanding of the programming context and clearly defines 
strategies and actions that are responsive to the Activity’s guiding principles and other 
considerations. 
c. The Applicant’s selection of the proposed geography and the extent to which it 
demonstrates it took into consideration criteria defined in this NOFO and shows how the Applicant 
will program collaboratively with other development actors, including but not limited to other 
USAID-funded activities. 
d. The likelihood of sustainability of the proposed approach beyond the life of the Activity, 
this includes a robust strategy to engage local organizations throughout implementation using cocreation, 
collaboration and learning among other mechanisms. 


Evaluation Criteria #2 - Management, Staffing Plan and Key Personnel 

The merit review will consider the extent to which: 

a. The proposed management and staffing plan effectively support the strategy presented to 
achieve the results in the Program Description. 
b. Proposed key personnel roles, qualifications, skills and responsibilities are adequate and 
consistent with the proposed technical application and it reflects a diverse team of qualified 
Colombian professionals. 
c. Ability to rapidly roll-out and manage the subawards fund, in line with USAID best 
practices, and provide capacity-building to sub-awardees and engage local organizations 
consistently throughout program implementation. 


 

Evaluation Criteria #3 – AMELP and CLA approach 

The merit review will consider the extent to which the Illustrative AMELP and CLA Strategy: 

a. Captures the full extent of the results and impacts, and their appropriateness to flexible, 


demand‐led, and complex change processes. 

b. Includes a CLA approach that is clear, responsive to the programming context and is 



embedded in the technical strategy and management and staffing plan. 

 

3. BUSINESS REVIEW 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre- award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient 
has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial 
resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the 
program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the 
risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with 
“specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 

A notice of award signed by the AO is the authorizing document. USAID will provide it to the 
selected Recipient electronically. Unsuccessful Applicants will be notified. 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this RFA cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. ADMINISTRATIVE & NATIONAL POLICY REQUIREMENTS 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the 
following policies and regulations. 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for 
U.S. Non-governmental organizations. 

For Non-US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard 
Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

For Public International Organizations: ADS 308 and Standard Provisions for Cost-Type 
Agreements with Public International Organizations (PIOs) 

This NOFO only contains provisions that are required at this stage. Final provisions will 
be incorporated in the final award as applicable to the selected Recipient. 

 

3. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

 

3.1 Financial Reports 

 

3.1.1. Quarterly Projected Expenditures 

The Recipient will submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a 
quarterly basis via electronic format. Electronic copies of the SF-425 can 
be found at: https://www.usaid.gov/forms/sf-425. 

The Recipient must submit a spreadsheet, within 10 days following the end of each 
USG Federal Fiscal Quarter (e.g., by October 10, January 10, April 10, and July 10), 
showing quarterly projected expenditures to the Agreement Officer Representative 
(AOR) in accordance with the schedule specified by USAID/Colombia. 

 

3.1.2 Quarterly Accruals Reports 

The Recipient is expected to submit accrual information to the AOR in 
accordance with the schedule specified by USAID/Colombia. 

 

3.2 Planning, Monitoring, and Learning Reports 

3.2.1 Inception Period Scope of Work 


The Recipient must submit a scope of work for the inception period that includes the 
proposed approach, activities, expected results, work plan, management and staffing 
structure, budget, and timeline. This scope of work must include a plan to ensure 
engagement of USAID, relevant USG, and other donor programs as well as engagement of 
other key stakeholders (GOC, private sector, civil society, etc.). In this inception phase, the 
Recipient will further test the geographic focus and may propose changes for USAID’s 
approval. 

The Recipient must include a draft Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 
(AMELP) as part of the Inception Period Scope of Work for USAID review and comment. 
Structure of the AMELP must follow guidance included in section 3.2.4. 

 Due Date: Thirty (30) calendar days after the beginning of the period of performance. 

 

3.2.2 Inception Period Report 

An inception phase report must be submitted at the conclusion of the inception 
period. The content/sections of the inception period report will be defined with 
USAID/AOR. 

 

Due Date: The inception period report must be submitted within 30 calendar days 
of the finalization of the three-month inception period. 

 

3.2.3 Annual Implementation Plan 

This document serves as a detailed guide to Activity implementation and once approved, 
represents an agreement as to the nature and timing of interventions and becomes a 
reference tool for the implementer and USAID to track progress on achieving the award 
objectives. Each annual implementation plan will form the basis for an annual management 
review conducted by USAID and the AOR to assess Activity directions, priorities, 
achievements, and prior year implementation results, as well as management and 
implementation impediments, and to make recommendations for revisions, as appropriate. 

The Annual Implementation Plans will include proposed activities for the given year, time 
frame for implementation, detailed budget, review of previous year’s accomplishments (if 
applicable), problems, and progress towards achieving the Activity’s objectives. 

All Annual Implementation Plans must be within the program description and must not 
alter the cooperative agreement program description or terms and conditions in any way; 
such changes may only be approved by the AO, in advance and in writing. Thereafter, if 
there are inconsistencies between the AIP and the program description or other terms and 
conditions of the agreement, the agreement will take precedence over the AIP. 

 

Due Date Year One: Within sixty (60) calendar days of the end of the inception period. 
This AIP will cover activities through the end of the current USG Federal Fiscal Year 
(October 1 – September 30). The first AIP must take into account the lessons learned and 
conclusions from the inception period. 

Due Date Subsequent Years: August 31 of every year. It will cover the Activity from 
October 1 through September 30. 


3.2.4 Activity Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP) 

The Recipient will be responsible for developing and implementing an Activity 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP). This plan will describe the 
process for tracking and documenting progress against the Activity objectives and 
expected results, over the life of the Activity. Its implementation will be used to 
identify challenges and lessons learned; influence decision-making for ongoing 
improvement and resource allocation; and serve for adaptive management. The 
AMELP must describe the MEL strategies, approaches and tasks as stated in USAID 
Automated Directives System (ADS) 201. 

It will contain at least the following sections: 

 

 a. Introduction and/or Overview 

This section will include a brief description of the Activity, its results framework, 
the theory of change and its alignment with the Colombia Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy (CDCS). 

 b. Monitoring Plan 

This section will incorporate the monitoring approach including performance 
indicators of outputs and outcomes that must be clearly articulated to the results 
framework (or logic model) of the Activity. The main objective (or goal) and the 
higher-level objectives (or components) of the results framework must be aligned 
with at least one outcome indicator directly attributable to or affected by the 
Activity. All the objectives at the different levels of the results framework will 
include the necessary output indicators to track progress of the Activity. Baselines 
and targets for all performance indicators included must be settled and included in 
a summary table. 

This plan will also include context indicators to track conditions and external 
factors out of the direct control of the Activity, that are relevant to its 
implementation and that will be used to monitor assumptions and risks identified 
in the results framework. No targets are required for context indicators. With the 
context indicators the Recipient should consider including at least one indicator to 
track and to comply with climate risk mitigation. When selecting performance and 
context indicators, the Recipient must consider their relevance and accuracy 
according to the intended results of the Activity, as well as the time and resources 
required to collect and report each indicator data. 

Some of the indicators proposed may include Foreign Assistance (F) Standard 
Indicators and USAID/Colombia Mission Indicators relevant for tracking progress 
of the expected results of the Activity. The Recipient will include this type of 
indicators in collaboration with the AOR and the MEL Specialists of 
USAID/Colombia. USAID/Colombia will provide guidance and the list: 
Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) of all active “F” and Mission 
indicators as soon as the Activity starts. 


As part of the AMELP, per ADS 205.3.6, “Integrating Gender Equality and Female 
Empowerment in USAID’s Program Cycle, Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning”, the Recipient must include gender sensitive indicators that focus on 
gender equality and female empowerment. Specifically, the indicators are to be 
designed to track changes in key gender gaps and male and female roles. The 
Recipient should also disaggregate information by gender and age and provide an 
analysis of the differing impacts on women, children, youth, and vulnerable groups, 
which may be ethnic communities, persons with disabilities, or the LGBTI 
community. The Recipient is encouraged to use USAID’s Standard “F” indicators 
related to gender where appropriate, and also to develop outcome indicators that 
quantitatively show the Activity’s impact on inequalities that exist in terms of 
gender and vulnerable populations. 

Data for beneficiary population indicators proposed should be disaggregated by 
geography (department, municipality), sex, and where possible, by age, by 
vulnerable and minority groups including ethnic groups. The Recipient must 
include gender sensitive indicators that focus on gender equality and female 
empowerment. Specifically, the indicators will be designed to track changes in key 
gender gaps and male and female roles. 

Beyond indicators, the Recipient will also incorporate as applicable other 
monitoring approaches that can provide qualitative insights, data collection on a 
more ad hoc basis, or more in-depth exploration into the achievement of results. 
Given the complex reality to which this Activity responds to, the Recipient is 
encouraged to include Complexity Awareness Monitoring and Evaluation 
approaches and tools as described in USAID’s Complexity- Aware Monitoring 
discussion notes. 

 c. Evaluation Plan 

The section will include any plan for internal evaluations to be developed by the 
Recipient over the life of the Activity, the type of evaluation (performance or 
impact), purpose and expected use, and an initial approach to possible evaluation 
questions, estimated budget, planned start date, and estimated completion date. The 
evaluation plan will also include any plans for collaborating with any external 
evaluations planned by USAID, which entails ensuring that external or USAID-led 
evaluations will have access to appropriate data collected by the Recipient, such as 
performance monitoring data. As appropriate, the Recipient should plan to collect 
baseline information during the inception phase. 

 d. Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) Plan 

This section of the AMELP will identify learning questions that relate to the 
Activity theory of change, potential gaps in the theory of change or technical 
knowledge base, and how the Activity relates to others known by the Recipient. 
The CLA plan may also indicate how the activity will address learning questions 
or knowledge gaps and identify ways to allow for adjustments as circumstances 
change or learning evolves. It will also describe and indicate the frequency of the 
learning and reflection activities that will be developed such as after-action reviews, 


workshops, and reports. It will also describe how knowledge and learning will be 
gained from implementation, evaluation findings, and monitoring data, among 
other sources, to adjust interventions and approaches, as needed. 

 e. Plan for Managing Data 

This section will have a full description of how the data and information will be 
collected, analyzed, and used, based on data quality standards referenced in ADS 
201. This section will include the data collection methods, the formats in which 
data will be held and shared within the Recipient facilities, data security protocols 
and data analysis and use, bearing into consideration USAID’s data quality 
standards. 

This section must also include a preliminary identification of the Open Datasets to 
be collected and submitted in USAID’s open data portal (www.usaid.gov/data) 
according to ADS 579. If all the datasets cannot be identified to the moment of the 
AMEL Plan approval, it must include provisions on future collection and 
submission in compliance with references of the ADS 579, such as incorporation 
of metadata and standards for geographic data. 

 f. Knowledge Management Plan 

This section will describe how the Recipient will ensure that knowledge is 
generated, captured, shared, and applied systematically and strategically. As a 
fundamental aspect of the aforementioned, the Recipient must describe how it will 
achieve effective coordination and complementarity between the AMELP and the 
Communications and Outreach Plan. 

 g. Roles and responsibilities 

This section will describe the composition of the staff/personnel needed to carry 
out the monitoring, evaluation and learning activities for the implementation of the 
AMEL Plan, including roles, responsibilities, and level of effort. 

 h. PIRS (Performance Indicator Reference Sheets) and CIRS (Context Indicator 
Reference Sheets) 

A PIRS and CIRS must be completed for all performance and context indicators 
included in the Monitor Plan. Each one describes all the relevant information 
necessary for those who collect or ultimately use the indicator data. The chosen “F” 
Standard and USAID/Colombia Mission indicators must comply with the existing 
Standard PIRS so that the results can be aggregated at Colombia Mission and other 
USAID levels. The Recipient may further define a “precise definition” according 
to the Activity’s context in the standard PIRS as appropriate. However, the precise 
definition must be within the scope of the indicator’s standard definition. 

 i. Annexes: 

As per ADS 201, every instrument or method used to collect or analyze information 
will be referenced and annexed to the AMELP. Annexes may also include other 
narratives and tables that the Recipient considers relevant for complementing the 
previous sections. 

 


Resources for AMELP construction: For guidance on the AMELP construction please 
refer to ADS 201, How-to Note: Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan and 
ADS Reference 201maf Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS). 
USAID/Colombia will also provide the Recipient with additional templates and guidance. 

 

Elaboration and approval of the AMELP: The AOR in collaboration with the 
USAID/Colombia MEL Specialists, and other relevant stakeholders as appropriate, will 
engage in co-creation with the Recipient to review and finalize the AMEL Plan, will 
verify that the proposed indicators are consistent with and meet the data collection needs 
of the Mission, and approve or concur with the plan. The AMELP is a critical mandatory 
tool for planning, managing, documenting, and evaluating performance over the life of 
the Activity. If over the course of implementation, modifications to the AMELP become 
necessary, the changes to the Plan must be approved by the AOR. 

 

Due Date: The AMELP must be submitted within sixty (60) calendar days of the 
end of the inception period. 

 

3.2.5 Communications and Outreach (C&O) Plan 

USAID/Colombia conducts public affairs to raise public awareness, understanding, and 
support for the role and contribution of U.S. assistance programs in Colombia. The 
Recipient must support USAID’s outreach to Colombian and U.S. audiences by producing 
informative materials explaining USAID’s efforts to assist the people and Government of 
Colombia to achieve the Activity’s objectives. 

The C&O Plan must explain how the Recipient will create and implement a variety of 
appropriate outreach and communications tools and platforms to i) raise public awareness, 
understanding, and support for the Activity; ii) help advance the Activity’s programmatic 
objectives in accordance with the requirements of Section A and C; and iii) contribute to 
knowledge management, including through close coordination with the AMELP. The 
Contractor will also include an annual Communications Calendar noting key elements and 
activities warranting public information and outreach activities. The C&O Plan must 
identify the audience (primary and secondary), format, schedule, and purpose of all internal 
and external communications products, including the required reports listed below. 

The C&O Plan must identify appropriate external communications products. Illustrative 
examples of other products that might be included are electronic bulletins, infographics 
and/or newsletters. The C&O Plan must include a narrative section describing the strategic 
purpose for each outreach tool not listed among the required reports. Additionally, the 
C&O Plan must include a section describing the resource needs for each communications 
product, to ensure adequate planning and execution of the plan to produce high-quality, 
timely, succinct, and effective communications tools. The Plan must also describe how it 
articulates and complements the AMELP under the KM umbrella; this must be evident in 
the communication and outreach activities included in the annual implementation plans. 

The draft C&O Plan will be refined jointly with the AOR and USAID’s Development 
Outreach and Communications Specialist. The C&O Plan must align with the Branding 
Implementation Plan and Marking Plan, which describe how they will communicate to 


3.2.7 Security Reports 





beneficiaries and stakeholder audiences that the work of this contract is from the American 
people per the Branding Strategy and USAID Branding Guidelines (see 
www.usaid.gov/branding). 

Due Date: Sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the inception phase. 

3.2.6 Safety and Security Plan 

One of USAID/Colombia’s primary programming concerns is that its implementing 
partners take all reasonable precautions to minimize risks to all staff and operations funded 
by the Agency. While risk can never be fully eliminated, USAID/Colombia expects its 
partners to be adequately prepared to work in the prioritized territories. The Recipient must 
submit a location-specific Safety and Security Plan for proposed operational areas, which 
may be as specific as by region, department, municipality, etc., where activities will occur. 
The Recipient will use discretion in providing a level of detail appropriate to the operating 
context and variance in conditions across the targeted areas. Submission of global security 
handbooks and/or policy documents does not qualify as a Safety and Security Plan. 

 

The Safety and Security Plan must be demonstrably written for and apply directly to the 
areas where activities will be implemented. All personnel and operations funded under this 
award, including sub-awardees or other partners with substantive programmatic 
contributions, must be covered by a safety and security plan. The Recipient must pay 
attention to the unique threats and vulnerabilities faced by their staff, beneficiaries, subawardees, 
etc., and directly address these threats and vulnerabilities in safety and security 
plans. 

 

In terms of protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) for activity staff, 
beneficiaries, sub-awardees, etc., the Recipient must describe how the activity will monitor 
this, as well as manage potential cases internally and externally according to relevant local 
laws. 

 

USAID/Colombia will not approve the safety and security plan. The safety and security 
plan is meant to demonstrate the Recipient’s due inclusion of a conflict-sensitivity and “Do 
No Harm” approach to ensure the security and protection of staff, beneficiaries, subawardees, 
etc. 

 

Due Date: Sixty (60) calendar days after the end of the inception period 

As part of the overall security requirements, the Recipient must report any security threats 
and/or incidents impacting the implementation of the award, verbally or by telephone, 
immediately to the AOR or Alternate AOR in the AOR’s absence. Subsequently, a written 
report must be promptly submitted. All sub-awardees will be required to report any 
threats/incidents to the prime Recipient, who will immediately notify the AOR. 

At the minimum, a security incident report must contain the name of the Organization, 
name of the individual(s), date, time, a description of what happened, where the incident 
occurred, and any other relevant details surrounding the incident. 


Due Date: The type and frequency of these reports may vary with the Activity scope and 
location. If this is an ongoing incident, progress reports must be submitted to keep the AOR 
apprised of the situation. 

3.2.8 Reporting in the Mission-wide Monitoring Management Information System 
(MONITOR) 

In compliance with ADS 201 and ADS 579 regarding data reporting, once the AMELP is 
approved by the AOR, the Recipient must register in USAID/Colombia’s MONITOR 
System the following: 

1. Activity information (Summary, start/end dates, objective, budget, geographical coverage, 
target population, etc.). 
2. Sub-activity information (Summary, start/end dates, objective, budget, geographical 
coverage, target population, classification), etc. A sub-activity is understood as an effort 
within the Activity, carried out either directly by the Recipient or by its sub-grantees/subcontractors. 
The sub-activity should have a clear purpose, USAID resources, indicators and 
targets linked to the Activity’s AMELP and an environmental determination. Sub-activities 
will be uploaded in the system on an ongoing basis. 
3. Sub-activity environmental compliance information. Should the Activity be rated as 
“negative determination” or “positive determination” in the Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE) and/or Environmental Threshold Decision (ETD), the Recipient will 
need to report on the compliance of applicable Environmental Management Approach 
(EMA) for each sub-activity on a quarterly basis. The EMA must identify mitigation 
measures and training needs to avoid harming people and ensure the wise use of USAID 
money through thoughtful, environmentally sound economic development - for activities 
that are subject to one or more conditions set out in the “Recommended Threshold 
Decision” section of the IEE. The Recipient should keep in mind that it’s its responsibility 
to: 
a. Develop and provide an EMA to USAID/Colombia Mission Environment Officer 
(MEO) for review and approval by registering each sub-activity in the MONITOR 
system (http://www.monitor.net.co). 
b. All sub-activities must be approved by the MEO of USAID/Colombia before 
starting through the MONITOR system, including Categorical Exclusion. 
c. Use the MONITOR system, as instructed by the MEO, to ensure compliance with 
USAID environmental regulation 22 CFR 216. 
d. Ensure that any appropriate environmental guidelines are followed and that 
mitigation measures described in the pertinent Threshold Decision (IEE) for each 
of these activities are funded and implemented, including any necessary training or 
capacity building, and adequate monitoring. 
e. Ensure that the EMA is implemented, even under subcontracts and subgrants. 



4. AMELP indicators (PIRS Information). The indicator results will be uploaded on a 
quarterly basis. Any modification to an Indicator and its PIRS needs to be validated and 
approved by USAID. 
5. The Recipient must report indicator progress into MONITOR, in parallel as the submission 
of the (Quarterly/Annual) Performance Progress Reports. This will allow aggregation of 
results at the Activity level and elaboration of progress reports by USAID/Colombia. 


3.2.9 Close-out/Demobilization Plan 


Six months prior to the end of the Cooperative Agreement, a close-out/demobilization plan, 
including the proposed disposition of equipment, including vehicles, must be submitted to 
the USAID/Colombia Agreement Officer for approval with a copy to the AOR. The closeout 
plan shall include a list of actions that are typically required for close-out activities 
such as: ensuring that all program activities are completed; conducting an analysis of 
progress to date and, if necessary, expediting timelines to ensure completion; a thorough 
pipeline analysis to ensure that there are sufficient funds available to finalize activities and 
complete all requirements; ensuring that all reports are submitted in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of the agreement; ensuring that all subcontracts and/or sub-awards 
are completed and payments settled, if applicable. The recipient must submit a final 
inventory of all residual non-expendable property that was acquired or furnished by the 
Government under the Agreement and request disposition instructions for any property 
acquired or furnished by the Government under the program. 

Particular care should be taken regarding vehicles, since their legal transfer may require a 
special procedure that would need to be completed before the award ends. 

 

Due Date: Six months prior to award completion date. 

 

3.3 Performance Reports 

 

3.3.1 Quarterly Performance Progress Reports 

Inform on progress and activities of the preceding quarter under the Agreement. The report 
must describe the tasks completed in the last quarter relative to what was anticipated by 
the approved Annual Implementation Plan and will assess overall Activity’s progress to 
date relative to the performance indicator targets. 

Due Date: 30 calendar days following the end of each USG Federal fiscal year quarter. 
The submission of the first report will begin following the submission of the first AIP. 

 

3.3.2 Annual Performance Progress Reports 

The fourth quarterly report shall also serve as the Annual Performance Report and should 
consolidate data from the previous quarterly reports in order to present annual totals for the 
numerical targets. The Annual reports shall include success stories for publication and 
focus on accomplishments, progress, and problems toward achievement of results, 
performance measures, indicators and benchmarks (tied to targets) for the quarter and the 
entire previous fiscal year. 

Due Date: Thirty (30) calendar days after September 30. 

 

3.3.3 Final Performance Progress Report 

To include an executive summary of the Recipient’s accomplishments in achieving results, 
targets, and impact; important research findings; comments and recommendations to 
USAID/Colombia for future programming; and a fiscal report that describes how the 
Recipient’s funds were used. The final report will highlight major successes achieved 
during the entire period of performance with reference to established targets and should 
also discuss any shortcomings and/or difficulties encountered. This report is to outline 


lessons learned and make recommendations for any future activity. 

Due Date: Sixty (60) calendar days prior to the end date of the Award 

 

4. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE 

4.1.a The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include 
environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and 
in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 
(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), which, in part, require that the potential 
environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision 
to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. The 
Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures 
are specified in the following paragraphs. 

4.1.b In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and 
USAID regulations, the latter will govern. 

4.1.c No activity funded under this cooperative agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for 
that activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial 
Environmental Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the 
Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as 
“approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

4.2 An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) [LAC-IEE-22-27] has been approved for the 
Program(s) funding this NOFO and covers actions expected to be implemented under this 
Cooperative Agreement. The selected recipient will be responsible for implementing all IEE 
conditions pertaining to activities to be funded under this NOFO. 

A Categorical Exclusion is issued to the following activities, which fall within the classes of 
actions described in Section 216.2(c)(2), "Categorical Exclusions" of 22 CFR Environmental 
Procedures Part 216: 

(i) Education, technical assistance, or training programs except to the extent such 
training programs includes activities directly affecting the environment (such as 
construction of facilities, etc.); 

(ii) Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings. 

(iii) Document and information transfers 

USAID has determined that a Negative Determination with conditions under the Restoring 
our Future Activity applies to the activities below. This indicates that if these activities are 
implemented subject to the specified conditions, they are expected to have no significant 
adverse effect on the environment. The Recipient will be responsible for implementing all 
IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be funded under this award. 


(i) Activities related to increased community disposition to reconcile and contribute 

to the non-repetition of conflict through support to local initiatives to build memory, 
economic partnerships with private and public sectors (supporting entrepreneurship 
activities, rural productive initiatives, arts, culture and sports initiatives, and other 
income generating opportunities) and behavioral changing communication 
campaigns. This may include small scale construction and rehabilitation/renovation 
of productive infrastructure, such as storing facilities and solar dryers 

 

The IEE for the Restoring our Future Activity does not contain any Positive Determination. 

4.3.a As part of its initial Implementation Plan, and all Annual Implementation Plans thereafter, 
the Recipient, in collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) 
and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, must 
review all ongoing and planned activities under this cooperative agreement to determine if 
they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 

4.3.b If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it must prepare an amendment to the documentation for 
USAID review and approval. No such new activities will be undertaken prior to receiving 
written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

4.3.c Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation will be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

4.4 When the approved Regulation 216 documentation is (1) an IEE that contains one or more 
Negative Determinations with conditions and/or (2) an EA, the Recipient must: 

4.4.a Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental 
mitigation and monitoring plan (EMMP) the Recipient must prepare an EMMP or an 
Environmental Review (ER) generated through the Monitor System describing how the 
Recipient will, in specific terms, implement all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to 
proposed project activities within the scope of the award. The EMMP or ER must include 
monitoring the implementation of the conditions and their effectiveness. 

4.4.b Integrate a completed EMMP or ER into the initial Implementation plan. 

4.4.c Integrate an EMMP or ER Plan into subsequent Annual Implementation Plans, making any 
necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts to 
the environment. 

4.5 Sub-grants are allowed under this award; therefore, the Recipient will be required to use an 
Environmental Review Form (ERF) or Environmental Review (ER) checklist using impact 
assessment tools to screen grant proposals to ensure that these will result in no adverse 
environmental impact, to develop mitigation measures, as necessary, and to specify 
monitoring and reporting. Use of the ERF or ER checklist is called for when the nature of 
the grant proposals to be funded is not well enough known to make an informed decision 
about their potential environmental impacts, yet due to the type and extent of activities to be 
funded, any adverse impacts are expected to be easily mitigated. Implementation of sub-grant 
and investment activities cannot go forward until the ERF or ER checklist is completed and 
approved by USAID. The Recipient is responsible for ensuring that mitigation measures 


specified by the ERF or ER checklist process are implemented. In cases where the nature of 
the investment is not well known enough to make an informed decision about potential 
environmental impacts, the final impact assessment can be deferred to a later stage in 
consultation with the AOR. 

 4.6 The Recipient will be responsible for periodic reporting to the USAID Agreement Officer 
Representative. 

 

5. CLIMATE RISK MANAGEMENT 

All USAID projects and activities approved after October 1, 2016, are required to be assessed 
for climate risks. The process of assessing, addressing, and adaptively managing climate risks is 
known as climate risk management (see Climate Risk Management for USAID Projects and 
Activities, a Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 201 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/201mal_042817.pdf). 

The goal of climate risk management is to make USAID’s development work more resilient to 
potential changes in climate or weather conditions -- such as increasing temperatures, more 
frequent droughts or floods, or large storms. These events can have potential negative 
consequences on projects or activities, making it more difficult to achieve results. With better 
analysis and planning, USAID can anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to these changing conditions 
and avoid inadvertently increasing our exposure to risk. 

Climate risk is the potential for negative consequences due to changing climatic conditions where 
the outcome is uncertain. The focus of climate risk management at USAID is on the risk to 
USAID development programs. This risk consists of individual climate risks—potentially severe 
adverse consequences for development programs resulting from the interaction of climate-related 
hazards with the vulnerability of societies and systems exposed to climate change. A climate risk 
may arise when something is exposed to a climate stressor such as higher temperatures, flooding, 
or drought. The level of risk increases as the magnitude of the negative consequence from the 
exposure increases and it also increases as the likelihood of the negative consequence increases. 

The Restoring our Future Activity design team, in consultation with the Mission Environmental 
Officer and Climate Integration Liaison MEO/CIL, considered the potential effect of climate 
risks/stressors on the sustainability of the Activity (changing precipitation patterns, rising 
temperature, floods, droughts, fires, landslides, etc.) in addition to the impact of activities on the 
climate (increased greenhouse gas emissions and land use changes, among others). 

The Restoring our Future Activity is identified mainly as low and high risks in terms of climate 
risk management. Activities that were identified as high risk are related to small-scale 
infrastructure, its refurbishment and agricultural production due to the vulnerability level to 
ensure climate resilient infrastructure and crops in Colombia. Colombia presents extreme events 
that vary from droughts to floods and from monotonous to flat areas, where erosion, landslides 
and other risks may occur. The Activity is not expected to generate any significant greenhouse 
gas emissions. Ongoing monitoring will ensure that implementation of project activities does not 
increase greenhouse emissions. 

For the Activity, USAID/Colombia conducted a climate risk assessment and will present results 


to the Recipient during the Post Award Orientation Meeting. If the assessment indicates moderate 
or high climate risks, each risk must be addressed by integrating risk management measures into 
activity implementation. This will be done through an Environmental Management Approach 
(EMA) in the Monitor system, where the Offeror will describe specifically how it will implement 
all Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) conditions and mitigation measures that result from 
the climate risk screening that apply to proposed activities within the scope of the contract, 
including identified climate risks. 

 

6. MANAGEMENT OF SUB-AWARDS 

The Recipient will establish a cost-effective system for awarding and managing subawards 
that is designed to be flexible and responsive to the needs of the project activities. 
The approach should include efficient procedures for identifying and approving sub-award 
applications. 

USAID must approve all sub-awards. All sub-awards must comply in all material respects 
with USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) Chapter 303, as well as the Code of 
Federal Regulations 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

The points of contact for this NOFO and any questions during the award process is as follows: 

 

William Sedlak 

Agreements Officer 

U.S Agency for International Development 

Carrera 45 No. 24B-27 

Bogota, Colombia 

 

Elkin Romero 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

U.S Agency for International Development 

Carrera 45 No. 24B-27 

Bogota, Colombia 

Email: elromero@usaid.gov 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

1. USAID RIGHTS 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The 
Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the 
expenditure of public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be 
subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

2. APPLICATIONS WITH PROPRIETARY DATA 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose 
or used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose should mark the cover page 
with the following: 

“This application includes data that must not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, 
however, an award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission 
of this data, the U.S. Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose 
the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This restriction does not limit 
the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained 
from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the 
following: 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the 
title page of this application.” 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

 


 

ANNEX 1: BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

 

An attachment is included in the NOFO in Excel format (.xsls) for the applicant to complete. 

 

 

[END OF ANNEX 1] 

 


ANNEX 2: TEMPLATE BRANDING STRATEGY AND MARKING PLAN FOR 
ASSISTANCE AWARDS 

 

C:\Users\FLoy\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\Content.MSO\16FFDF95.tmp 


 

 

1. GUIDANCE 


USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, activities, public communications, or commodities 
implemented or delivered under co-funded instruments – such as grants, cooperative agreements, 
or other assistance awards that usually require a cost share – generally are “co-branded and comarked.” 
This policy applies to assistance awards even when the award does not require any cost 
sharing. 

Co-branding and co-marking mean that the program name represents both USAID and the 
implementing partner, and the USAID identity and implementer’s logo must both be visible with 
equal size and prominence on program materials produced for program purposes. However, the 
AO, after consulting with the activity manager/requesting office, may determine that activity 
goals require that the USAID Identity be larger and more prominent, if USAID is the majority 
donor and the USAID funded activity or public communication is especially visible and 
important to USAID. 

A host-country symbol or ministry logo or other U.S. Government seal or logo may also be 
added, if applicable. 

Marking is not required for recipient’s offices, vehicles, and items the recipient procures for its 
own administrative use. The prohibitions on use of the USAID Standard Graphic Identity (see 
320.3.1.5 and 320.3.1.6) apply by USAID policy to recipients of grants and cooperative 
agreements. 

2. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS - BRANDING 


This sample/template is based on ADS 320.3.3 and 2 CFR 700.16 and has the branding and 
marking requirements for assistance awards only. The recipient, by responding to the 
questions in italics, will be able to substantially comply with the ADS and CFR 
requirements. 

When preparing these documents use the following guidance: 

● USAID identity must follow guidance laid out in the USAID Graphic Standards 
Manual 
● No contractor logos 
● No acronyms 
● Do not use other competing identities (unless granted an exception by the 
appropriate USAID officer.) 
● Include the word “Project” at the end of the name of the activity 



● Do not use add a slash after USAID to add the project name, it is reserved for 
USAID Missions. 
● Do not use project names that look like a brand 


 

key/legend: To be completed by the partner 

 

1. TEMPLATE 


 “USAID BRANDING STRATEGY” 

AWARD TITLE 

AWARD NUMBER 

DATE OF PLAN 

1) Program Name 


 [Name] (Follow guidelines in March 16, 2016 USAID Graphic Standards Manual and 
Partner Co-branding Guide, Section 4 entitled Grants, Cooperative Agreements & 
Assistance https://www.usaid.gov/branding/gsm). 

 

The activity’s name in English will be the Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Colombian 
Empowerment Activity. Please propose a Spanish name for the activity. 

 

2) Desired level of visibility: Select high, medium or low visibility determined by 
considerations for each activity and its communication strategy. 


 

3) Positioning 


This section discusses how to publicize the program, visibility considerations, and 
includes a description of the communications tools to be used. 

The Recipient may use co-branding and co-marking in accordance with ADS 320.3.3.1 
for visual, textual and verbal materials and communications, which may be translated into 
host-country languages as appropriate. Presumptive exceptions will be outlined in the 
Marking Plan and if/when a situation arises that is not considered in the Marking Plan, it 
will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Agreement Officer’s Representative 
(AOR) and Agreement Officer (AO). 

4) Budget 


Please include all estimated costs associated with Branding & Marking for USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events and materials. 

● Will a program logo be developed and used consistently to identify this program? If yes, 
please attach a copy of the proposed program logo. (Please note that all logos must be 
approved by Branding Champions in Washington). 



5) Program Communications and Publicity 
● Who are the primary and secondary audiences for this activity? 
● What communications or activity materials will be used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries? 
● What is the main activity message? 
● Will the recipient announce and promote this activity publicly to host country citizens? If 
yes, what press and promotional events are planned? 
● Please provide any additional ideas about how to increase awareness that the American 
people support this activity. 
6) Key milestones and opportunities 


The following key milestones are anticipated to generate awareness that the program is from 
the American people. These milestones may be linked to specific points in time, such as at the 
beginning or end of a program, or to an opportunity to showcase reports or other materials 
(consult ADS 320 and 2 CFR 700). These include, but are not limited to: 

● training events, 
● publishing reports, 
● highlighting success stories, 
● promoting final or interim reports, and 
● communicating program impact/overall results 
● speaking engagements, including in communities. 
7) Acknowledgements 
● Will there be any direct involvement from a host country government ministry? If yes, 
please indicate which one or ones. Will the recipient acknowledge the ministry as an 
additional co-sponsor? 
3. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS - MARKING 


USAID’s policy requires non-U.S., non-governmental organizations, including cooperating 
country non-governmental organizations (and in rare cases, Public International Organizations) 
to follow marking requirements for assistance awards. Marking requirements, including requests 
for presumptive exceptions and waivers for assistance awards must be in accordance with 2 CFR 
700.16(h). 

With reference to ADS Sections 320.3.3.2 and 2 CFR 700.16, the Recipient shall prepare a 
Marking Plan containing information substantially similar to the sample provided below: 

 

 

“USAID MARKING PLAN” 

AWARD TITLE 


AWARD NUMBER 

 

Marking Plan for the [Name] Activity 

With reference to ADS 320.3.3 and 2 CFR 700, below is the required Marking Plan: 

1.0 MARKING 

1.1 MARKING PLAN 

Table 1 outlines the types of materials and activities that may be produced under the USAID 
[Name] Activity Any materials and activities that are not anticipated below, but are produced 
under the initiative, will also be subject to branding guidelines and AO approval, as appropriate. 
The goal is to mark activities, and not implementing partners. 

All materials, activities and deliverables marked with the USAID logo for the [Name] Activity 
will follow design guidance for color, type, and layout in the USAID Graphic Standards Manual 
and Partner Co-Branding Guide (March 2016) as related to equipment, reports, studies, events, 
and public communication (including printed products, audio, visual, and electronic materials), 
etc. The USAID logo will be used for programmatic correspondence. Recipient’s letterhead will 
be used for administrative correspondence and will not have the USAID logo. Business cards 
will not show the USAID logo but may use text: USAID Recipient. 

After award and prior to printing, please provide graphic examples of visual marking of 
materials, activities and deliverables using the USAID logo and activity name in situations of cobranding 
and no-branding, in both English and Spanish. 

There are two criteria used to determine when the disclaimer provision must be used: 

a) As per 2 CFR 700.16(c ) (1) Studies, reports, publications, Websites, and all 
informational and promotional products not authored, reviewed, or edited by USAID; and 
b) As per the discretion of the AOR and Recipient’s consideration of a specific situation. 


However, AOR should review and approve all public communication materials where the 
USAID logo is used. 

The provision is as follows in English and Spanish: 

This study/report/Website/video (specify) is made possible by the generous support of the 
American People through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The 
contents of this (specify) are the sole responsibility of (name of organization) and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government. 

Este estudio/reporte/sitio web/video fue posible gracias al apoyo generoso del pueblo de los 
Estados Unidos, a través de la Agencia de los Estados Unidos para el Desarrollo Internacional 
(USAID). El contenido de este estudio/reporte/sitio web/video es responsabilidad de 
________________ (nombre de la organización) y no necesariamente refleja el punto de vista 
de USAID o del gobierno de los Estados Unidos. 

Sub-recipient: As specified in the standard provisions, the marking requirements will “flow 
down” to sub-recipients or sub-awards, and will include the USAID-approved marking provision 
in all USAID funded sub-awards, as follows: “As a condition of receipt of this sub-award, 


marking with USAID identity of a size and prominence equivalent to or greater that the 
recipient’s, sub-recipient’s, other donor’s or third party’s is required.” 

 

TABLE 1. MARKING PLAN FOR MATERIALS AND ACTIVITIES (illustrative examples 
only) 

Follow the guidelines contained in the USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co- 
Branding Guide (March 2016). 

Category/Material 

Type of Marking 

 

Visual, Verbal, Textual 
Disclaimer 

Administrative 

 

 

Activity related stationery 
products 

The USAID logo will be used. 

Visual 

Textual 

Contract Deliverables: 
documents, publications, 
studies, reports, papers, 
technical assistance consultant 
reports 

Follow guidelines for 
exclusive marking. Use 
specific language for 
deliverables when submitted 
to USAID for review. 

 

Visual 

Textual 

 

Program Communication 

 

 

 

Technical reports, 
publications, documents, 
studies 

The USAID logo will appear 
on the cover; design follows 
guidelines for exclusive 
branding unless co-branding is 
acceptable, or an exemption is 
provided for no branding. 

Visual 

Textual 

__ 

Consider Disclaimer 

 

Training materials, manuals 
and sessions 

The USAID logo will appear 
on the cover of documents and 
verbal branding will be used 
at training sessions; design 
follows guidelines for 
exclusive branding unless cobranding 
or an exception for 
no marking is indicated. 

Visual, 

Textual, 

Verbal 

__ 

Consider Disclaimer for 
Visual & Textual 

 

Audiovisual: Video, CDs- 
ROM, Animated Infographics 

The USAID logo will be 
printed on CD labels, splash 
screen/menus, and packaging; 
design follows guidelines for 

 

Visual 




exclusive branding unless cobranding 
or an exemption is 
indicated for no marking. 

 

PowerPoint presentations 

The USAID logo is required 
as per USAID presentation 
template; design follows 
guidelines for the exclusive 
branding unless co-branding is 
acceptable or an exemption 
for no branding is indicated. 
Templates available at 
www.usaid.gov/branding/reso 
urces 

 

Visual 

 

Posters, banners, exhibition 
booth signs, event signage 

The USAID logo will appear 
on the material; design 
follows guidelines for 
exclusive branding unless cobranding 
or an exemption for 
no branding is indicated. 

 

Visual 

 

Program public awareness, 
advocacy and behavior change 
materials and activities 

The USAID logo will appear 
on each material based on the 
purpose and type of material, 
target audience and how to be 
used. Design follows 
guidelines for exclusive 
branding unless co-branding 
or an exemption for no 
branding is indicated. 

 

Visual, 

Textual or 

Verbal 

Web portal and social media 
platforms (Facebook, Twitter, 
Flickr, blogs, others) 

Follow guidelines in ADS 558 
for appropriate branding and 
marking. 

Visual 

Textual 

Institutional 
Communication 

 

 

Photographs, Infographics 

The USAID logo or “USAID” 
in text will appear on the 
material; design follows 
guidelines for exclusive 
branding unless co-branding 
or an exemption for no 
branding is indicated. 

Visual 

Textual 

__ 

Consider Disclaimer on 
Infographics 




Collateral, print information 
material (i.e., success stories, 
fact sheets, articles, feature 
stories, others) 

The USAID logo will appear 
on printed materials; design 
follows guidelines for 
exclusive branding. 

Visual 

Textual 

Equipment purchased for their 
own use 

The USAID logo will appear 
on items; exclusive branding 
unless co-branding is 
acceptable or an exemption 
for no branding is indicated. 

Visual 

 



Websites. Websites that are produced under USAID-financed assistance instruments must follow 
the guidelines of ADS 557.3.4.02. Websites that are produced under USAID-financed assistance 
instruments and fall outside the scope of 557.3.4 must comply only with USAID branding 
guidelines for assistance instruments (Branding Guidelines). As provided in this chapter, 
LPA/PIPOS must be notified of the URL as far in advance of the site's launch as possible. 
Websites that are produced under USAID-financed assistance instruments and fall outside the 
scope of 557.3.4 must not reside on a .gov domain. The site must be marked appropriately on the 
index page of the site and every major entry point to the Web site with a disclaimer that states: 
"The information provided on this Web site is not official U.S. Government information and 
does not represent the views or positions of the U.S. Agency for International Development or 
the U.S. Government." 

1.2 Exceptions to Contract Marking Requirements 

If applicable, use one or several of the following exceptions to fill out Table 2, depending on the 
circumstances. In addition to the table below, details about why the exception is required must be 
attached to this marking plan. 

2 CFR 700.16 (h) Presumptive Exceptions 

a. Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and 
materials. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: ∙ Election monitoring 
or ballots, and voter information literature; ∙ Political party support or public 
policy advocacy or reform; ∙ Independent media, such as television and radio 
broadcasts, and newspaper articles and editorials; and ∙ PSAs or public opinion 
polls and surveys. 
b. Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be seen as independent. 
c. Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, policies, 
studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, PSAs, or other communications 
better positioned as “by” or “from” a cooperating country ministry, organization, or 
government official. 



d. Impair the functionality of an item, such as sterilized equipment or spare parts. 
e. Incur substantial costs or be impractical, such as items too small or other otherwise unsuited 
for individual marking, such as food in bulk. 
f. Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate on such items as 
condoms, toilets, bed pans, or similar commodities. 
g. Conflict with international law, such as the internationally recognized neutrality of the 
International Red Cross (IRC) or other organizations. 
h. Deter achievement of program goals, such as cooperating with other donors or ensuring 
repayment of loans. 


 

 

Category/Material for exception 

 

Specific Exception(s) 

Visual, 
Verbal, 
Textual 

Administrative 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Communication 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Institutional Communication 

 

 

 

 

 

Commodities and Equipment 

 

 



1.3 SUB AWARDS 

Sub awards when authorized in accordance with ADS 303, must be branded and marked 
following the guidelines of the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan approved for the prime 
award. The Recipient is responsible for including branding and marking requirements for these 
subawards. 

1.4 PREPRODUCTION REVIEW 

USAID requests preproduction review of USAID-funded public communications and program 
material for compliance with USAID graphic standards and the approved Marking Plan. 

1.5 GRAPHIC EXAMPLES 

Provide graphic examples of visual marking for the materials included under Table 1 using the 
USAID logo, co-branding, and project name in both English and Spanish. 


Also provide graphic examples for the materials with exceptions to marking requirements (if 
applicable). 

Incorrect example for project name 

 

Correct example for project name 

 

 

 

[END OF ANNEX 3] 

 


ANNEX 3: LIST OF EXTERNAL LINKS AND REFERENCES 

 

Title 

Link 

Colombia’s Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) 

https://www.usaid.gov/colombia/cdcs 

 

ADS Chapter 201 Program Cycle 
Operational Policy 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200/201 

 

ADS Chapter 303 - Grants and 
Cooperative Agreements to Non- 
Governmental Organizations 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ 
1868/303.pdf 

 

CFR 200.306 - Cost sharing or matching 

https://ecfr.io/Title-02/pt2.1.200#se2.1.200_1306 

 

ADS Chapter 204 - Environmental 
Procedures 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200/204 

 

U.S General Services Administration - 
Per Diem Rates 

https://www.gsa.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diemrates 


 

Private Sector Engagement 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/private-sectorengagement 


 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ 
1865/USAID_PSE_Policy_FAQs.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X6FC.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00Z4G2.pdf 

 

Collaborating, Learning and Adapting 
(CLA) 

https://usaidlearninglab.org/qrg/understanding-cla-0 

 

Evaluation Policy at USAID 

https://usaidlearninglab.org/evaluation-toolkit?tab=2 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ 
1870/USAIDEvaluationPolicy.pdf 

 

Monitoring 

https://usaidlearninglab.org/monitoringtoolkit?
tab=3 

 

https://usaidlearninglab.org/library/complexityaware-
monitoring-discussion-note-brief 

 

Gender and Social Inclusion 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1865/toolkitintegrating-
gbv-prevention-and-response-economicgrowth-
projects 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/gender-equalityand-
womens-empowerment/womens-economicempowerment 





 

https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/democracyhuman-
rights-and-governance/protecting-humanrights/
disability 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00TPD8.pdf 

 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjRmLTkxNjk 
tZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTgzODI1&qrs=R 
mFsc2U%3d&q=KERvY3VtZW50cy5Eb2N1bWV 
udF9UaXRsZTooU3R1ZHkgb24gU29jaWFsIGFuZ 
CBJbnN0aXR1dGlvbmFsIFRvbGVyYW5jZSBvZi 
BWaW9sZW5jZSBBZ2FpbnN0IFdvbWVuKSk%3 
d&qcf=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjRmLTkxNj 
ktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&ph=VHJ1ZQ%3d%3d 
&bckToL=VHJ1ZQ%3d%3d&rrtc=VHJ1ZQ%3d% 
3d 

 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjRmLTkxNjk 
tZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTgzNjkw&inr=V 
HJ1ZQ%3d%3d&dc=YWRk&rrtc=VHJ1ZQ%3d% 
3d&bckToL= 

 

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Dyh7_h7FLnNsn93 
Tns-RezrftrohVzz7/view 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ 
1870/Youth_in_Development_Policy_0.pdf 

 

https://www.youthpower.org/toolkit-youth-mentalhealth-
and-psychosocial-support-toolkit 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/indigenous-peoples/usaidpolicy-
on-indigenous-peoples 

 

Outreach and Communications 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/500/501mad 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/branding 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/branding/resources 

 

Victims of the armed Conflict – Victims 
Institutional Strengthening Program 
reports and documents. 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00STRC.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00STRB.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAH397.pdf 




http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAH392.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAJ573.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAJ572.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAJ595.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAJ612.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAJ583.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAH396.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KV8J.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KKM5.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KF1F.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00K95D.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7R.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7Q.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7N.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7J.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PBAAB582.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00JNNS.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7G.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7F.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7D.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR7C.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KR79.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRQ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KHGZ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KHCB.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG69.pdf 




http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG65.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG5X.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG5H.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PDACX523.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRP.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRN.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRM.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRJ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRH.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRG.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG59.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG58.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG53.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG4B.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KG3M.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00JMMW.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00K662.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQRF.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KQQN.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRTD.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRTB.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRT9.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRT8.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRPJ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRPG.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRPC.pdf 




http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRH2.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRH1.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRFB.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF9.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF8.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF7.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF6.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF5.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF4.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF2.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRF1.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDZ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDX.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDW.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDV.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDT.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDS.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDQ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDP.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDN.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDM.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDK.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDJ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDH.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDG.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDF.pdf 




http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XRDD.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQW4.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQW3.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQW2.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQW1.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVZ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVX.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVP.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVN.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVM.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVK.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVJ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVG.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVF.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVD.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVC.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQVB.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQV9.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQV7.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQP6.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQP5.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQP4.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQP3.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQP2.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQNX.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQNW.pdf 




http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQNV.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMP.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMN.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMM.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMK.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMJ.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMH.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMG.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQMF.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00W9SP.pdf 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XSHD.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XSHC.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00Z4H8.pdf 

http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00Z4HB.pdf 

Reconciliation - Alliances for 
Reconciliation (PAR) reports and 
Documents 

https://cienciassociales.uniandes.edu.co/reconciliaci 
on/barometro/ 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00T56G.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X319.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X31B.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X31G.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X31H.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X31F.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XM9H.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XM9G.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XM9F.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X48D.pdf 




 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X283.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XQNJ.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2TK.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2VK.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2XF.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2WS.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2WT.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2Z3.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2Z2.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00X2Z1.pdf 

 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00Z4G1.pdf 

 

Reconciliation – C-AME Monitoring and Evaluation Documents of 
the PAR Activity 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjR 
mLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTE5M 
TE0 

 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjR 
mLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTI1Nz 
Mw 

 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjR 
mLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTYwO 
TI4 

 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjR 
mLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTYwO 
TI5 

 

https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjR 
mLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTc5O 
TI4 

 




https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/Detail_Presto.aspx 
?vID=47&ctID=ODVhZjk4NWQtM2YyMi00YjR 
mLTkxNjktZTcxMjM2NDBmY2Uy&rID=NTg3M 
zY5 

 

Digital Tools 

https://www.usaid.gov/usaid-digital-strategy 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ 
DECA_Report_COLOMBIA_EXTERNAL_15OCT 
20.pdf 

 

Regional Integration 

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sndDp3qTd6OdwC 
dULnK8wjSNd17loAZK/view?usp=sharing 

Local Capacities 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ 
LCD_Policy_-_FORMATTED_508_01-11.pdf 



 

 

[END OF ANNEX 3] 

 

 

[END OF NOFO No. 72051422RFA00001] 

 


