 

 

Issue date: ………………………................ August 11, 2022, 16:00, Addis Ababa 

Deadline for written Questions: …….......... August 29, 2022, 16:00, Addis Ababa Time 

Closing date: …………………………….. September 28, 2022, 16:00, Addis Ababa Time 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number 72066322RFA00006 

 

Program Title: USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development’s (USAID) Mission in Ethiopia 
(USAID/Ethiopia) is seeking applications for a cooperative agreement from qualified entities to 
implement the USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity, subject to the availability of funds. 
Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly to 
understand the type of activity sought, application submission requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and meet 
eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on www.grants.gov, 
and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check the website to ensure 
they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity and to ensure that the 
NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 

 

USAID/Ethiopia bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion 
processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact 
the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.6.7. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin registration early in the process. 

 

Oral Presentation: For the second stage, if evaluated as a highly rated applicant under the Merit 
Review Criteria, applicant(s) will be invited to deliver an oral presentation of their application. These 
applicants will be provided with more detailed information regarding the content and procedure for 
the oral presentation one week prior to the date of the presentations, based on the strengths and 
weaknesses and other issues identified in the evaluation process in the short-written application phase. 
Applicants can be expected to make a one-hour presentation to provide more detail on their 
Technical Approach; Management and Staffing Approach; Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
Approach; and Local Ownership and Sustainability. It is expected that there will be an additional 
one-hour discussion with USAID to further explore any outstanding issues. After oral presentations 


and feedback received, applicants will be expected to submit revised applications within 15 days. 
USAID/Ethiopia will then use the Merit Review Application Criteria set forth in Section M below to 
select the successful applicant. 

 

Please send any questions to the points of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for questions 
is shown above. Responses to questions received by the deadline will be furnished to all potential 
applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government nor 
does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or submission of 
comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant. All 
preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID/Ethiopia programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

//Signed (Original Signature on File)// 

Alula Abera 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition and Assistance 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Contents 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................ 3 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................... 5 
A.1 ACTIVITY TITLE ............................................................................................................... 5 
A.2 ACTIVITY GOAL ............................................................................................................... 5 
A.3 BACKGROUND ................................................................................................................. 5 
A.4 PROBLEM STATEMENT .................................................................................................. 7 
A.5 ACTIVITY ALIGNMENT WITH COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION 
STRATEGY (CDCS)...........................................................................................................7 
A.6 GENERAL ACTIVITY GUIDANCE ................................................................................ 8 
A.7 ACTIVITY/PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ........................................................................... 8 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ................................................................. 17 
B.1.Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated ................................ 17 
B.2 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards ................................................ 17 
B.3 Substantial Involvement ..................................................................................................... 17 
B.4 Authorized Geographic Code ........................................................................................... 18 
B.5 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient ....................................... 18 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ........................................................................... 19 
C.1 Eligible Applicants ............................................................................................................. 19 
C.2 Cost Sharing or Matching .................................................................................................. 19 
C.3 Number of Applications that May be Submitted ............................................................... 19 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ..................................... 20 
D.1. Agency Point of Contacts ............................................................................................. 20 
D.2 Questions and Answers ............................................................................................... 20 
D.3 General Content and Form of Application ..................................................................... 20 
D.4 Application Submission Procedures.............................................................................. 22 
D.5 Technical Application Format ........................................................................................ 23 
D.6Business (Cost) Application Format........................................................................... 25 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ........................................................ 38 
E.1 Criteria ................................................................................................................................ 38 
E.2 Review and Selection Process ............................................................................................ 38 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION.............................. 41 
F.1. Federal Award Notices ...................................................................................................... 41 
F.2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements .............................................................. 41 
F.3. Reporting Requirements .................................................................................................... 41 
F.4. Program Income................................................................................................................. 45 
F.5. Environmental Compliance ............................................................................................... 45 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) ............................................ 47 
G.1. Points of contact (POC): .................................................................................................. 47 
G.2. The Agreement Officer Representative (AOR): .............................................................. 47 
G.3. Different contacts for distinct kinds of help,.................................................................... 47 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION ..................................................................................... 48 
ANNEX 1 – BUDGET FORMATS ......................................................................................... 49 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS ................................................................................ 56 
REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS ....................................................................... 58 

 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as amended. 
The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost 
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well 
as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

A.1 ACTIVITY TITLE 

 

USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement 

 

A.2 ACTIVITY GOAL 

 

The goal of Civic Engagement activity is to strengthen Ethiopia’s civic fabric in support of more 
inclusive, peaceful, and responsive governance. 

 

A.3 BACKGROUND 

 

When Prime Minister (PM) Abiy Ahmed assumed office in April 2018, he initiated a series of political, 
economic, and security reforms intended to transition Ethiopia to a market-based, multi-party democracy. 
Thousands of political prisoners were released, and exiled opposition parties were invited to return to 
compete in what were intended to be Ethiopia’s first true multi-party elections. The appointment of 
respected opposition figures to lead the transformation of critical institutions - including the Federal 
Supreme Court, National Elections Board and Ethiopian Human Rights Commission - were positive 
signs of the new administration’s commitment to democratic reforms. Major revisions to legislation 
governing civil society, media, electoral processes, and anti-terrorism are important steps towards 
institutionalizing rule of law and democratic governance. A recent USAID-funded public opinion survey, 
however, found that citizens do not perceive reforms have trickled down to the local level. 

 

A history of top-down command and planning structures, corruption, and party and ethnic favoritism in 
personnel appointments have resulted in inequitable, inefficient services, poor infrastructure 
management, and a lack of transparency and accountability in how scarce public resources are used. 
Inequalities are prevalent across multiple dimensions including urban/rural, region, age, gender, and 
ethnic identity, affecting access to services, land and natural resources, employment, and economic 
opportunities, justice, and political power. 

 

Opportunities for citizen voice and engagement in governance processes are very limited, and there are 
few accountability mechanisms at any level. A draft National Civic Engagement Policy intended to 
institutionalize civic participation in policy making and oversight processes at all levels is stuck with the 
Council of Ministers and its future is unclear. While there are some “positive deviant” examples of line 
ministries, legislative committees and local governments engaging with sector-based civil society 


organizations (CSOs) and community based organizations (CBOs)1low levels of trust between public 
officials and civil society hamper collaboration. The multi-donor Ethiopia Social Accountability Program 
(ESAP) has supported the creation of over 300 woreda-level, social accountability councils, with another 
100 plus to be established; however, the sustainability of these councils beyond ESAP funding is 
uncertain. 

1 For example, CSOs like the Ethiopian Women Lawyers Association have had some success working with 
parliamentary committees to revise Ethiopia’s criminal code to include gender-based violence crimes, and health 
CSOs were important advocates for the introduction of community-based health insurance. 

2 A recent report highlights the growing ethnification of both public and private media. 

 

In 2009, Ethiopia’s Charities and Societies Proclamation closed civic space for organizations working on 
democracy, human rights, justice and other rule of law issues, decimating most organizations working on 
these issues. A handful went underground and some others shifted to service delivery and humanitarian 
assistance to survive. The passage of the new Civil Societies Organization Proclamation in 2019 removed 
many of the 2009 law’s draconian restrictions and established a new Agency for Civil Society 
Organizations to provide regulatory and administrative oversight of CSOs. A CSO Council was also 
recently established by Parliament as an independent entity to support and represent the CSO sector, but 
will need substantial support to develop organizational and technical capacity and play its intended role. 

 

While a small number of groups are working on human rights, elections, and governance issues, in light 
of Ethiopia’s history of repression they are proceeding with caution. Nascent CSOs - especially those 
outside of Addis - need significant support to: build capacity and networks; develop advocacy, policy, 
and budget analysis skills; participate in national, regional, and community dialogue; and engage in 
collective action for more accountable governance and peaceful conflict resolution. Although the formal 
civil society sector is weak, there are a range of other community and civic organizations, both formal 
and informal (such as trade unions, workers’ and teachers’ associations, water users associations, 
business organizations, community savings groups, peace committees, university clubs, youth groups, 
customary and traditional institutions, etc.) that, with support, can be mobilized to coalesce around issues 
of shared concern and contribute to peaceful, inclusive solutions to Ethiopia’s governance challenges. 
Ethiopia’s participation in the 2021 Open Budget Survey, plans to join the Open Government 
Partnership, engagement in the Construction Industry Transparency Initiative (COST), and a forthcoming 
MAPS (Methodology on Assessing Procurement Systems) assessment may offer potential entry points to 
create more inclusive mechanisms for civic engagement. 

Ethiopian media was until recently entirely controlled by the government, and while new private media 
have sprung up over the past few years, the quality and objectivity of reporting are poor. Recent 
reforms including the new Media Proclamation and overhaul of the Ethiopia Media Authority are 
generally viewed as positive steps. However, in Ethiopia’s increasingly polarized contextpotential misuse. Since 
the start of the conflict in northern Ethiopia in late 2020, there are increasingly worrying signs of 
closing media space, including self-censorship, detention and killings of local journalists, and the 
deportation of some of their foreign counterparts. 
2 and with 
social media churning out mis/disinformation, the broad language in the new Hate Speech and 
Disinformation Prevention and Suppression Proclamation raises concerns about 


Over the last several years, the country has been experiencing more intense and widespread conflict 
with deteriorating security and increasing instability in a growing number of places across the country. 
The winner-take-all approach to politics in Ethiopia, societal polarization, and a rise in hate speech are 
all contributing to the escalating violence, and approximately 32 percent of Ethiopia’s zones 
experienced some form of political violence in 2020. These conflicts pose a growing threat to the state 
due to the increased scale and scope of violence against civilians and political and economic-related 
violence through riots, protests, violent insurgencies and proxy forces. Additionally, shifts in the 
security sector since 2018 have resulted in more emboldened and sizable regional state militias, which 
have been drawn into the northern conflict. 

Nearly four years after Abiy became prime minister, Ethiopia’s nascent democratic transition is at a 
critical juncture. Rising ethnic and regional fissures, and growing insecurity and conflict across the 
country highlight the fragility of the Ethiopian state. National and regional elections planned for 2020 
were postponed due to Covid 19, and an estimated 20 percent of constituencies were not included in 
the 2021 polls due to insecurity, conflict, and issues with ballots. The ruling Prosperity Party won 454 
out of the 483 House of People’s Representatives seats that were contested. There is no clear 
resolution in sight to the northern conflict, which has provoked a major humanitarian crisis and 
massive human rights violations committed by all parties to the conflict. The GOE recently 
established a National Dialogue Commission to address long-standing issues related to Ethiopia’s 
political settlement. Whether it will be able to resolve deeply-rooted challenges and historical 
narratives during its three-year mandate remains an open question. 

A.4 PROBLEM STATEMENT 

 

For Ethiopia, a country with a long history of authoritarian rule, deepening ethnic, 
intercommunal, and religious conflict, and increased instability and violent conflict, the 
pathway to democratic, inclusive governance is a multi-generational goal. Citizen distrust of 
government runs deep, years of repression gutted civic institutions, and opportunities for 
meaningful citizen engagement in shaping government policy and budget priorities are limited. 
Civic actors have a vital role to play in shaping Ethiopia’s political future, pressing for more 
inclusive, accountable government and respect for human rights, contributing to the peaceful 
resolution of the country’s complex conflicts, and revitalizing shared values of co-existence 
and tolerance among diverse groups. To do so, they require sustained support to develop the 
skills, confidence, and agency to: conduct evidence-based analysis; craft effective messages 
and advocacy strategies; and forge broad-based, multi-stakeholder coalitions that can 
constructively engage across ethnic, religious and political party lines on sensitive policy, 
political, and conflict-mitigation issues. 

 

 A.5 ACTIVITY ALIGNMENT WITH COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION 
STRATEGY (CDCS) 

 

Within the 2019-2024 USAID/Ethiopia Country Development Cooperation Strategy, Civic Engagement 
is a core activity under the Citizen-Responsive Governance (CRG) Project and contributes to the Special 
Objective, Citizen Responsive Governance Enhanced. It addresses CDCS cross-cutting issues of 


Notice of Funding Opportunity Number:72066322RFA00006

USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity

governance, conflict sensitivity, gender, and youth and supportsboth strategic principles:Improved 
citizen empowerment and household and communityresilience and well-being andMore effective andaccountable systems and institutions at all levels.USAID/Civic Engagementis aligned with the GOE’sdemocracy goals under theNew Horizon of Hope and willhelp movethe needle on Ethiopia’sSelf-
Reliance Roadmap, specifically commitments to open and accountable governance and governmentand 
civil society capacity.

A.6 GENERAL ACTIVITY GUIDANCE
Operational Principles

●Employ a systems lens-Beintentionalaboutmapping and understanding the ecosystem ofrelevant actors and factors that contribute toissues of shared concern.
●Collaborate for collective impact - Seek active collaboration among implementers, host country 
governments, community leaders,the private sector, civilsociety, USG agencies and partners,
internationalagencies, and donors. 
●Maintaina flexible, iterative approach that embraces collaboration, learning and adapting 
(CLA)– Civic Engagement mustbe readytoadapt tochanges on the ground dueto the volatileand dynamic nature of theoperating environment. 
●Focus on cultivating diverse, transformational relationships- Be deliberate about bringing 
together unusual suspectsto build social capital, trust, mutualrespect, and alliances that fosterinclusive dialogue.
●Amplify marginalizedvoices -Ensurethat women, youth, people with disabilities, and othermarginalized Ethiopians are fullyengagedin all programming.
●Embed a conflict-sensitive “Do No Harm” approach -In all activity interventions. 
A.7 ACTIVITY/PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
7.1 Activity Goal
The goal of Civic Engagementisto strengthen Ethiopia’s civicfabricin support of moreinclusive, 
peaceful, and responsive governance.

7.2 Activity Purpose
Civic Engagement’spurpose isto 1)Strengthen civic and community-based actors’ capacity to engage in 
policy analysis, advocacy, dialogue, and collective action for peaceful, democratic change;and 2) Fostermulti-stakeholder civic partnershipsin support of inclusive dialogue, respectfor human rights, and 
advancing more effective, citizen-responsive, and accountable governance.

7.3 Technical Approach
Page 8of 59


Civic Engagement is envisioned to serve as a “backbone” that will facilitate horizontal and vertical 
coalitions, both formal and informal, between a broad range of civic actorswhat is already 
working and support ‘best fit’ rather than ‘best practice’ approaches. The selected implementing partner 
should actively nurture “non-traditional” coalitions of partners with shared interests and incentives in 
addressing specific governance, accountability, human rights, and conflict problems and opportunities. 
Such loosely-defined partnerships will take different forms and be of varying durations, depending on the 
issue and space for change. 
3. It will strengthen their 
capacity to engage in advocacy, policy and budget analysis, and collective action that leads to more 
inclusive, citizen-responsive policies, budgets, and governance. The focus will be on supporting groups 
that demonstrate a commitment to peaceful engagement, that enjoy credibility with core constituencies, 
that are willing to engage without the promise of funding support, and that see the value in developing 
skills and networks around locally defined priority issues. Programming should build on 

3 This includes established CSOs, community groups (e.g. water users associations, producers associations, health 
committees), woreda social accountability councils, social entrepreneurs, youth groups, faith leaders, women’s 
organizations, business associations, celebrities, artists, musicians - and government. 

 

Civic Engagement will operate in a political environment fraught with ethnic cleavages, security 
challenges, and evolving regional dynamics. This will require highly adaptive and flexible programming 
and management approaches informed by a deep understanding of local, regional, and intergovernmental 
political economy dynamics. The Civic Engagement team should place a premium on regular analysis of 
power relations between different actors (political, economic, traditional, religious, diaspora, civil society 
etc.), their alignment of interests and sources of contention, and incentives/disincentives to support 
greater, more inclusive civic engagement in political dialogue, conflict-mitigation, and governance 
processes. This thinking and working politically approach to programming will necessitate a level of trust 
and collaboration between USAID and the selected implementing partner that creates an environment 
conducive to flexible, context-driven programming approaches (e.g., problem-driven, iterative 
adaptation), with rapid cycles of strategy testing and feedback loops that inform programming 
adjustments and decisions to scale up or terminate interventions. The non-linear pathways to change that 
Civic Engagement seeks to facilitate also necessitate thinking differently about program staffing, 
resource allocations, and how to measure progress and outcomes. 

 

7.4 Leveraging, Collaboration, and Locally-Led Partnerships 

 

Sustained improvements in governance accountability hinge in large part on how USAID investments 
support Ethiopian ownership of reform and systems change. This is reflected in the Civic Engagement 
operating principles laid out in Section 6 above, and will underpin all Civic Engagement with civic 
actors, government, and other Ethiopian stakeholders. Civic Engagement will place a premium on 
investing in relationships and playing a behind-the-scenes role in strengthening systems and leveraging 
other USAID, donor, and homegrown initiatives. 

 

The activity will be expected to proactively seek opportunities for joint programming, learning, and 
networking with other USAID implementing partners/activities working in the same geographic areas to 
amplify results and maximize resources. These include the Integrated Youth Activity, forthcoming 
Empowering Communities for Better Health, Urban WASH, and Disaster Risk Management - 


Notice of Funding Opportunity Number:72066322RFA00006

USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity

Professionalization and Youth Leadership activities, theMarket Systemsfor Growth activity, a newLowlands Resilience Backbone Supportactivity, and new Resilience Food Security activities. Theparameters and scope of cooperation and collaboration will beidentified during the inception phase and 
on a rolling basis overthelife of the activity. Illustrative opportunities could include regularmeetingsbetween activity directors and staff;‘speed dating’eventsto identify cross-project partnering 
opportunities; joint work planning; and shared workshops, networking, and peer learning events. 

Cooperation With Other Development ActorsA number of bilateraland multilateral development agencies, international NGOs, and foundationsaresupporting civil society strengthening, social accountability and governance-related programming. CivicEngagement is expected to be proactive in regularly mapping thisspace and seeking opportunities to 
leverage resources and collaborate, including the option of soliciting buy-in/contributions from like-
minded bilateraldonors to scale successful practices.

7.5 Activity Logic Model
Table
Description automatically generated
7.6 Core Objectives and Expected Results
Civic Engagement’s objectives, theory of change, and implementation approach are grounded in thebeliefthat sustainable change mustbe driven bylocalactors,addressing multi-faceted governance 
challengesthrough enhanced collaboration and mutualaccountability. Civic Engagementwillbuild theorganizationaland technicalcapacity ofdiverse civic actors, working individually and collectively to 
advance citizen-responsivegovernance, inclusive, respectfuldialogue, and respect for human rights. Theactivity will convene diverse local players, facilitate horizontal and vertical coalitions, and catalyze 
change, empowering civic actorswith lastingskills, collaboration practices, and networks thatposition 

Page 10of 59


them as more equal partners in Ethiopia’s journey to peaceful, inclusive, accountable governance. 

 

Preliminary Theory of Change: 

If diverse civic stakeholders are supported to develop their organizational and technical capacities and to 
build outreach, advocacy and collaboration skills, and if they engage in collective action through 
“invited” entry points for engagement with government and “invented” new spaces for constructive civic 
engagement and dialogue, then Ethiopia’s civic fabric will be strengthened in support of more peaceful, 
inclusive, accountable governance. 

 

Objective 1: Strengthen civic and community-based actors’ capacity to engage in policy 
analysis, advocacy, dialogue, and collective action for peaceful, democratic change 

 

USAID seeks to build the ability of civic actors to represent the perspectives and needs of their 
constituents, participate in dialogue, influence public policy and budget priorities, and hold the 
government accountable for its commitments to citizen-responsive governance, respect for human rights, 
and inclusive dialogue and conflict resolution processes. Traditional organizational capacity development 
and grant-making will be part of Civic Engagement, but as a “backbone,” Civic Engagement will test 
novel approaches - including civic incubators4, regional peer exchanges, coaching, and mentoring - to 
support and amplify a range of voices and emerging social movements. 

4 See, for example, OpenGovHub and the Accountability Lab. While “bricks and mortar” incubators may not be 
financially sustainable beyond the life of the activity (though developing sustainable revenue streams, such as 
renting meeting space, should be pursued), rooting a culture of locally-grown “civic incubation” and collective 
action are intended outcomes of Civic Engagement. 

 

Expected results: 

● Civic actors demonstrate increased capacity to articulate the interests of their 
constituencies through evidence-based research and policy analysis, and to 
constructively engage with government and advocate for more inclusive governance 
● The perspectives and voice of marginalized populations including women, youth, people with 
disabilities, and ethnic minorities are amplified in policy, governance, and conflict mitigation 
processes 
● Citizens and local civic actors demonstrate greater participation in governance 
processes, actively representing their concerns and priorities through institutionalized 
and ad-hoc mechanisms 
● Citizens and civic actors demonstrate mutual trust and accountability in addressing 
governance issues and resolving disputes through dialogue and peaceful conflict 
resolution methods 


 

Objective 2: Foster multi-stakeholder civic partnerships in support of inclusive dialogue, respect for 
human rights, and more effective, citizen-responsive, and accountable governance in Addis Ababa and 
select alternative growth poles 

Civic Engagement is rooted in an understanding that strengthening accountability between citizens 
and government involves a complex set of inter-linkages in which mutual trust is key to fostering 


shared expectations and collective action. The weak state of Ethiopian CSOs is a major constraint to 

Civic Engagement will facilitate horizontal and vertical coalitions between a wide range of civic 
actors. The activity will foster collective action leading to tangible changes in support of more 
inclusive, conflict-sensitive, and citizen-responsive policy processes and services. These coalitions 
may cut across civil society, community and faith-based organizations, political parties, youth and 
women’s groups, the private sector, media, and, in some instances, government. They can take 
different forms and be of varying durations, depending on the issue and space for change. 

Expected Results 

● Locally-led platforms facilitate dialogue and consensus-building on citizen-defined 
policy, budget, and service delivery issues 
● Broad-based coalitions galvanize action and civic-government partnerships to enhance 
inclusion, respect for human rights, and more accountable, responsive governance 
● Collective action is institutionalized as a practice and culture for civic engagement in governance 
and peacebuilding processes 


 

Inclusion of Marginalized Voices 

Civic Engagement seeks to elevate the voices and agency of youth, women and girls, people with 
disabilities, ethnic minorities, and other marginalized groups5. Women and girls in Ethiopia face 
significant challenges to achieving equality and empowerment in political, governance, and peace-
building processes. Cultural norms and beliefs, gender roles and responsibilities, gender based violence, 
access to and control over resources, patterns of decision-making power, and limited enforcement of laws 
to protect the rights of women and girls collectively impede their full participation6. Civic Engagement 
should prioritize contextually appropriate, practical strategies that foster meaningful engagement of 
marginalized voices in civic, governance, and conflict-mitigation processes, and that enhance their 
capacity and agency to advocate for equal rights and protections. 

5 For example, the Federation of Ethiopian National Associations of Peoples With Disabilities and Ethiopian 
Women Lawyers Association are partners under USAID/Ethiopia’s elections and rule of law programs. 

6 In the 2015 elections, women gained nearly 39 percent of seats in the House of People’s Representatives and 32 
percent in the House of Federation, but these numbers declined in the 2021 elections. 

 

Youth between the ages of 15 and 29 represent approximately a third of Ethiopia’s population and are a 
priority target group for Civic Engagement. They played an important role in the 2018 political changes 
(notably the Queerro and Fanno youth groups in Oromia and Amhara) and had high hopes that the new 
government would offer them new economic opportunities and political influence. These expectations 
have not been met and with limited economic opportunities, youth discontent is growing. Ethno-
nationalist political parties and so-called “activists'' are capitalizing on this to co-opt groups like the 
Qeerroo and Fanno, university clubs, and other more loosely organized youth groups, stoking ethnically 


based conflict that has in some instances resulted in deaths, looting and damage to property, and burning 

● youth-driven or youth-led, in order to yield the most durable results for youth empowerment; 
● engaging youth in relevant activities that address their own interests and experiences; 
● action-oriented or do not have clearly specific goals youth wish to achieve; and 
● providing opportunities for youth-adult partnerships. 


 

USAID’s Positive Youth Development framework will be an important lens for engaging youth from all 
walks of life in Civic Engagement. The activity will also be expected to work closely with the Mission’s 
new Integrated Youth Activity (IYA), and with the Office of Transition Initiative’s Ethiopia Support 
Program, which works with a range of youth and youth-serving local partners. 

 

7.7 Local Ownership and Sustainability 

 

Civic Engagement’s objectives, theory of change, and implementation approach are grounded in the 
belief that sustainable change for more accountable governance at the local level can only be driven by 
local actors. As noted above, Civic Engagement will serve as a “backbone” for collective action by local 
civic and government stakeholders, convening dissimilar local players, facilitating horizontal and vertical 
coalitions, fostering collaboration, and catalyzing change on issues that have local salience. While the 
“bricks and mortar” component of the program may not be sustainable beyond the life of the activity 
(though developing sustainable revenue streams, such as renting meeting space, will be pursued), Civic 
Engagement will empower local civic actors with new skills, collaboration practices, and 
vertical/horizontal linkages that help position them as more equal partners in supporting Ethiopia’s 
transition to accountable, democratic governance. 

 

The activity is aligned with GOE democracy goals under the New Horizon of Hope, and will help move 
the needle on Ethiopia’s Self-Reliance Roadmap, specifically commitments to open and accountable 
governance and government and civil society capacity. 

 

7.8 Gender 

 

While Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed’s appointment of women as president, chief of the federal supreme 
court, head of the elections board, attorney general and minister of peace, gender analysis found that 
women and girls in Ethiopia face significant challenges to achieving equality and empowerment in 
political and governance processes. Cultural norms and beliefs, gender roles and responsibilities, access 
to and control over resources, patterns of decision-making power, and laws collectively impede their full 
participation. Women’s representation in the House of People’s Representatives fell from nearly 39 
percent of seats in the last Parliament to 37 percent in the 2021 elections ( with the exception of Tigray 
region constituencies and the remaining Benishangul-Gumuz region constituencies). Civic Engagement 
will prioritize gender equality and women’s empowerment and monitor gender implications and 
opportunities, and will collect disaggregated data about women and girls’ participation in programming. 

 

7.9 Climate Risk 

 


The climate risk assessment conducted for the Special Object IEE gave a “low" climate risk for 
interventions related to Civil Society Organization and Media Support. Accordingly, no further 
climate risk management (CRM) is required for this activity. 

 

7.10 Environmental Compliance 

 

In accordance with USAID policies and procedures related to environmental compliance, the 
SpO prepared an umbrella IEE that covers all planned activities under Civic Engagement. This 
IEE was approved by the Africa Bureau Environmental Officer in January 2020 and remains 
valid until July 2022. The approved IEE gave a Categorical Exclusion determination for this 
activity. Accordingly, no further environmental assessment is required 

 

7.11 Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Considerations 

 

Civic Engagement’s MEL approach will allow for ongoing review, evaluation, and reassessment of 
program tactics and strategies, help measure local ownership and buy-in, and provide the implementing 
partner (IP) and USAID with analysis to inform shifts in resources and/or strategy. The MEL system 
should reflect USAID’s Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) principles, integrating real-time 
monitoring and learning back into program implementation and ensuring that emerging knowledge and 
evidence is shared with the broader Mission/IP community, other donors, and local stakeholders. 
USAID/Ethiopia is currently procuring a new CLA activity, which will serve as an important platform to 
facilitate collaboration and learning among USAID/Ethiopia implementing partners for collective impact. 

 

USAID recognizes that the success of Civic Engagement will depend on the contributions of actors 
directly and indirectly engaged with the activity. It will also depend on the actions of institutions and 
processes beyond the manageable interests of the Civic Engagement IP. Changes in the local or regional 
context may have implications for the achievement of results. The selected IP will be expected to 
regularly revisit the (final) activity theory of change to assess whether assumptions continue to hold and 
indicators remain relevant and may request changes to the MEL plan with the concurrence of USAID. 

 

Refine and Implement Period 

The first six months following award will be an inception period to allow the Civic Engagement team to: 

1) Deepen their understanding of on-the-ground conditions. USAID’s Local Systems Framework ‘Five 
Rs” (roles, rules, relationships, resources, and results) offers a useful lens through which to understand 
local political economy dynamics; 

2) Map the landscape of related USAID, other donor, civil society, and GOE initiatives to define the level 
of sequencing and layering required; 

3) Consult/develop initial relationships with key Ethiopian counterparts (non-governmental and 
governmental) and USAID implementers; 

4) Identify and plan (initial) collaboration opportunities; ground truth programming approaches and 
refine Civic Engagement’s theory of change; 

5) Recruit and train initial Civic Engagement team; and 

6) Create a learning agenda and develop the MEL plan, consulting with the new Mission CLA platform 
as appropriate. 

 

At the end of six months, the Civic Engagement team will present a revised life-of-project design and 
updated work plan for discussion and approval. Proposals should articulate how offerors will maximize 


the value of this six-month inception period, including milestones for key actions and how it will be 
utilized for administrative start-up procedures. 

 

Development Information Solution (DIS) 

In compliance with ADS 201 and ADS 579 regarding data reporting, once the Activity CLA/MEL Plan is 
approved, the Recipient must submit all performance management information into the Development 
Information Solution (DIS) at the required frequencies. Data that shall be submitted to DIS include: 

1. Indicator results (baseline and targets will be entered by USAID based on the approved Activity 
CLA/MEL Plan) 
2. Intervention locations (including status, start and end dates and approximate financial resources 
for each location). 
3. Submission of reporting period progress reports including supplemental and supporting 
materials. 


 

The AOR will provide DIS system access instructions and training materials as necessary. 

 

7.12 Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 

 

ADS 579 establishes the requirements governing USAID’s development data lifecycle from collecting 
data to making it accessible. To fulfill the requirements of ADS 579 and promote best practice 
geographic data collection and management, the following defines standards that apply to geographic 
data associated with planning, managing, and implementing USAID/Ethiopia development programming. 

 

The Recipient must apply methods to support USAID/Ethiopia’s efforts to incorporate geographic data 
and analysis into USAID’s overall development planning, design, and CLA. The Recipient must include 
geographic data collection, analysis, and submission methods in the CLA/MEL Plan and Work Plans as 
separate sections. There are four types of geographic data that the USAID/Ethiopia requires in a 
standardized manner: 

 

1. Activity and Intervention Location Data: The Recipient must submit Activity and Intervention 
Location Data according to the Mission’s data requirements into DIS. Activity and Intervention 
Location Data refers to data that records a discrete point location for activity and intervention 
sites. When point data is not available, presence data of activities or intervention at the Woreda 
(Admin 3) level should be submitted into DIS. Reference Activity Location Data (ADS 579mab) 
2. Monitoring Data: Geographically disaggregated indicator data that are used to investigate the 
geographic variation in performance for improved monitoring, learning, and adapting. Indicator 
data should be collected at the smallest administrative unit or point location possible. The 
performance indicator reference sheet (PIRS) should denote the level of collection. (Reference: 
Monitoring Data Disaggregation by Geographic Location). 
3. Thematic Data: This refers to data such as demographic and health indicators, land use land 
cover, hydrology, and transportation infrastructure. When the Recipient creates or acquires such 
data sets using USAID funds, it must submit them to the AOR. 
4. Activity Specific Geographic Data: This refers to data such as the analytical output of a 
geographic analysis that is conducted while implementing an Activity. An example would be 
performing a geographic analysis of access to university employment services, when the 
Recipient creates or acquires such datasets and analysis using USAID funds it must submit them 
to the AOR. 


 

7.12.1 GIS Data Submission 


 

The Recipient must submit all geographic data to the AOR and it will be reviewed in consultation 
with Program Office or other technically qualified USAID staff to ensure that it meets the 
geographic data reporting requirements and minimizes risks. When possible, data should be 
submitted via DIS, for datasets that cannot be submitted to DIS, consult with the AOR for 
submission options including possibly loading to the Data Development Data Library (DDL). 
The Recipient should not submit personally identifiable information (PII, i.e. identify individuals 
in data submissions). 

 

Geographic Data must be submitted in industry standard formats such as Shapefile (.shp) or GeoTIFF, 
GeoJSON, or in a File Geodatabase. Cartographic products generated using GIS technology shall be 
submitted in the industry standard formats of an Esri Map Document (.mxd) or Quantum GIS Project 
(.qgs). All datasets should include metadata. 

 

Below are some standards for data sets submitted to USAID/Ethiopia: 

Coordinate System/Datum: EPSG:4326 or WGS 84 

Coordinate Format: Decimal Degrees (DD.DDDDDD) with at least 6 decimal places 

Accuracy Level: Less than 15 meters 

 

References: 

Geographic Data Collection and Submission Standards (ADS 579saa) 

 

Non-Spatial Data and Software 

All data the Recipient creates, collects, purchases, or acquires that supports the objectives of the activity 
shall provide a copy of data to USAID through a system provided by USAID including the Development 
Data Library (DDL). 

 

The Recipient shall provide USAID all processed intermediate and raw data when requested. 

 

Software: If the Recipient develops software such as applications/apps to process activity-related data, 
the Recipient must provide such software, documentation of the software, and copy and source code of 
the software to USAID. If the implementer develops an online repository of project-related information, 
then it is mandatory for the implementer to provide USAID/Ethiopia full access to this information, 
including the right to extract data. If the implementer buys software with significant resources, prior to 
purchase, the implementer must coordinate with USAID with regards to its use after the project closes 
out. 

 

7.13 Activity’s Targeted Setting (Geographic and Population Target) 

 

Civic Engagement will engage with civic actors in Addis Ababa and two alternative growth pole cities 
and their rural hinterlands, selected due to their ability to serve as “urban anchors” for surrounding rural 
areas, and to promote cross-sectoral, integrated programming with other USAID and non-USAID 
programs. The short-list includes Adama and Bishoftu; Bahir Dar; Dessie and Kombolcha; Dire Dawa 
and Harar; Hawassa and Shashemene; and Jijiga. A final determination will be negotiated between 
USAID and the successful applicant. 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 


 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1.Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID/Ethiopia intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID/Ethiopia 
intends to provide about USD $21,500,103 in total over four years. 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications. 

 

B.2 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is four years. The estimated start date will be January 1, 2023. 

 

B.3 Substantial Involvement 

 

Type of Award and Substantial Involvement 

 

USAID plans to negotiate and award an assistance instrument known as a Cooperative Agreement with 
the successful applicant for this program. Potential applicants should note that USAID policy prohibits 
the payment of fee/profit under assistance instruments. 

 

A Cooperative Agreement implies a level of “substantial involvement” by USAID (see ADS 303.3.11). 
This substantial involvement will be through the Agreement Officer, except to the extent that the 
Agreement Officer delegates authority to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) in writing. 
The intended purpose of the substantial involvement during the award is to assist the recipient in 
achieving the supported objectives of the agreement. The anticipated substantial involvement elements 
for this award are listed below (this list does not include approvals required by Standard Mandatory 
Provisions for Non-US NGOs or other applicable law, regulation or provision): 

 

3.1. Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans, including but not limited to, annual work 
plans, life-of-project exit strategy, and any subsequent revisions of such plans. If at the time of award, 
the program description does not establish a timeline in sufficient detail for the planned achievement 
of milestones or outputs, USAID may delay approval of the recipient’s implementation plans for a later 
date. USAID must not require approval of implementation plans more often than annually. If the AO 
has delegated authority to the AOR to approve implementation plans, the AOR must review the 
agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure that changes to the terms and conditions are not 
inadvertently approved by the AOR. 

 

3.2. Approval of Specified Key Personnel USAID may designate as key personnel only those 
positions that are essential to the successful implementation of the Recipient’s program. USAID’s 
policy limits this to a reasonable number of positions, generally no more than five positions or five 
percent of Recipient employees working under the award, whichever is greater. 

 

3.3. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation in implementation, including, but 
not limited to, participation in advisory committees and direction and/or redirection of activities 
specified in the program description due to GOE priorities and guidance as well as interrelationships 
with other programs. 

 


a) Concurrence on the Substantive Provisions of Sub-Awards. 2 CFR 200.308 already 
requires the recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or 
contracting out of any work under an award. 


 

b) Approval of the Monitoring Evaluation & Learning Plan – the ME&L Plan will be 
developed in consultation with USAID/Ethiopia. During the initial project planning period, the 
recipient shall work closely with USAID/Ethiopia to ensure that the ME&L plan clearly links 
the Recipient’s activity with the objectives and targeted outcomes of the Program Description. 
The jointly developed ME&L plan shall be submitted within 90 calendar days of the award. 


 

c) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the program 
description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. 


 

d) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members and participation in 
the advisory committee, if the program will establish an advisory committee that provides 
advice to the recipient. 


 

3.4. Agency Authority to Immediately Halt Construction. 

 

There is no construction for this activity. 

 

B.4 Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 935. 

 

B.5 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement 
Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for 
ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of 
the award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume 
responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, 
program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

B.6. Selection of Instrument 

 

Due to the nature of the collaboration implicit in the USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity, 
USAID/Ethiopia believes that a Cooperative Agreements (in which substantial involvement will 
include approval of Implementation Plans, Key Personnel, and Agency and Recipient Collaboration or 
Joint Participation) will likely be the primary vehicle for this initiative, but the actual award type or 
engagement will depend upon the most appropriate mechanism or approach for the intended results. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 

 


 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 Eligible Applicants 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

C.2 Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

Cost Sharing is not required for this activity, though it is encouraged and the use of cost share funds 
may lead to a program with greater impact. 

 

C.3 Number of Applications that May be Submitted 

 

Any one entity/organization may submit one (1) application for funding in response to this Notice of 
Funding Opportunity (NOFO) as a prime awardee. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1. Agency Point of Contacts 

 

Name: Mariamawit Girma 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email Addresses: mgirma@usaid.gov and caddis@usaid.gov 

Name: Admir Serifovic 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email Addresses: aserifovic@usaid.gov 

D.2 Questions and Answers 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted through e-mail to caddis@usaid.gov and 
Mariamawit Girma at mgirma@usaid.gov. The subject line must state “Questions on 
“USAID/Ethiopia – Civic Engagement Activity; 72066322RFA00006” no later than the date 
and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective 
applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants 
as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or 
if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

D.3 General Content and Form of Application 

 

USAID/Ethiopia will accept applications from qualified entities as defined in Section C of this 
NOFO. The Applicant should follow the instructions set forth herein. If an applicant does not 
follow the instructions, the application may be downgraded and may not receive full credit 
under the applicable merit review criteria, or, at the discretion of the Agreement Officer, be 
eliminated from the competition. 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: - the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) 
Application. This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full 
application. Please see subsections D.5 and D.6, below, for information on the content specific 
to the Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address 
technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and 
address risk and other related issues. 

 


Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) number: 

 

Applicant name: 

 

 

Project title: 

 

 

Total USAID funds requested: 

 

 



Proposed period of performance: 

 

 



Applicant’s full address and telephone number 

(primary or lead applicant) 

 

 

Identification and signature of the primary contact 
person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address) and 
the identification of the alternate contact person (by 
name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone 
number and email address) 

 

 

Name of any proposed sub-recipients or 
partnerships (identify if any of the organizations are 
local organizations, per USAID’s definition of 
‘local entity’ under ADS 303. 

 

 

Name and Signature of Individuals authorized to 
negotiate terms, conditions and countersigns the 
award (title/ position, email address, telephone 
number) 

 

UEI numbers of applicants and sub-awardees/ 
partners. Tax identification number, and Letter of 
Credit (LOC) number for the applicant, if available. 

 



 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the application. 
Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by evidence of that 
agent’s authority unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the issuing office. 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve only as 
a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part of the merit 
review criteria. 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent sections. 
Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 



● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 11-point Times New Roman font, 1.5” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 11 
point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted 
in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no hidden 
formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to the 
Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application submission is 
the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may 
be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should retain a 
copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

D.4 Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of 
delivery receipt date and time and/or confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

 D.4.1 Email submission 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to caddis@usaid.gov with a copy to Ms. Mariamawit Girma 
at mgirma@usaid.gov. Email submissions must include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the 
subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also 
indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the 
emails and their attachments (e.g., "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being 
sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization 
name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

Telegraphic or faxed or hard copy applications are not authorized for this NOFO and will not be 
accepted. 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email to 
confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, please 
send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name if submitted 
via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless 
there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours 
occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in 
sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government 
infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 


There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, applicants 
are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/ cannot guarantee their acceptance by the 
internet server. 

Each email with file attachments must not exceed 20MB in size. 

D.5 Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application must 
demonstrate the applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this 
program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit review 
criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The Technical Application should consist of the following: 

(a) Cover Page (as discussed above); 








 

(b) Table of Contents: 








 

Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit review 
criteria. 

 

(c) Executive Summary (one page) 








 

The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical 
Application. 

(d)Technical Application Body (not to exceed 20/twenty) pages excluding annexes); 

Based on the Merit Review Criteria, the Technical Application Body will contain the following 
sections: 

d.1 Technical Approach 

d.2 Management and Staffing Approach 

d.3 Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Approach 

d.4 Local Ownership and Sustainability 

The basic purpose of the Technical Application Body is to provide the information necessary to allow 
USAID/Ethiopia to evaluate the applicant fairly and completely under each of the merit review criteria 
specified in Section M of this NOFO. Additional specific guidance for each Section of the Merit 
Review Application Body is set forth below: 

 

 

d.1 Technical Approach 

 

The applicant should propose an overall approach to achieving programmatic objectives, describing 
how it is fit for purpose in Ethiopia’s current civic and political context. This section should outline 
how the applicant plans to engage and empower a broad range of civic actors in articulating and 
addressing priority local inclusion, governance, rights, and accountability issues, which may, for 


example, include “traditional” training, mentoring, coaching, regional exchanges, micro-grants, etc. 
The applicant should also describe its vision for the civic incubator concept as a means to foster 
networking, collaboration, partnerships, and joint learning. 

 

As part of the methodology the applicant should outline its approach to experimentation, learning, and 
adaptation, particularly when supporting new and non-traditional civic voices, movements and 
emerging civic groups. The applicant should also describe its approach to using micro-grants and in-
kind support to test innovative approaches to enhancing civic voice and agency. 

 

The applicant should provide an illustrative first-year work plan in the form of a Gantt or similar type 
of chart that outlines planned activities and sequencing during the first year, with a special focus on 
maximizing the three-month inception period. This chart should not exceed three pages and be 
included as an annex to the technical application (it does not count against the 20 page technical 
section limit). 

 

d.2 Management and Staffing Approach 

 

The applicant will describe the proposed composition and organizational structure of the project team 
in both Addis and the two regional hubs. Applicants have discretion to propose staffing patterns and 
designated key personnel positions as long as the skill sets and experience requirements described 
below are satisfied. USAID retains the right to determine, in consultation with the presumed awardee, 
which positions will be designated as key personnel in the final award. This section should also 
outline the role that different consortium members are expected to play, their respective roles and 
responsibilities, their place within the reporting structure, their technical expertise and experience, and 
how the prime applicant will manage other consortium partners. The applicant should provide 
resumes/CVs of proposed key personnel (not to exceed three pages each) and an organizational chart 
in an annex. Resumes/CVs for proposed key personnel must demonstrate the communication skills, 
managerial capabilities, and technical capacities of key personnel, among other relevant factors as 
determined by the applicant. Each should include at least three recent references, along with an email 
address and phone number for each reference. 

 

Key Personnel Required Skills and Experience 

 

The Key Personnel, as a team, must possess the following skill sets: 

 

● Demonstrated knowledge and understanding of the history, context, and issues related to civil 
society and civic engagement in Ethiopia and similar context. 
● Demonstrated knowledge and understanding of Ethiopia’s and similar complex political, 
governance, and conflict dynamics 
● The COP/DCOP must, between them, have at least 15 years of combined progressive 
professional experience managing civil society strengthening/civic engagement programs in 
similar contexts and an advanced degree in public policy, political science, international 
relations, social anthropology, or a related field 
● Strong interpersonal and communication skills, and a proven ability to network and maintain 
effective working relationships with diverse actors including CSOs, civic groups, community-



based organizations, media, academia, political parties, government, the private sector, and 
donors 
● Experience working with youth groups and emerging social movements 
● Experience managing diverse teams located in different geographic locations 
● Experience assessing the development needs of a diverse range of civic actors/groups and 
developing innovative approaches to building their organizational, advocacy, and 
policy/budget analysis capacity, fostering diverse partnerships and networking opportunities, 
and supporting locally-led collective action 
● Experience with and commitment to locally led development approaches (e.g., co-creation, 
micro-grant making, cultivating collective action practices) and adaptive management 
processes 


 

d.3 Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Approach 

 

The applicant should propose a preliminary MEL plan that describes how it will track and 
measure progress against activity objectives and capture unexpected outcomes; embed continuous 
learning feedback loops; test and evaluate innovative approaches; and adapt programming and the 
MEL plan in response to lessons learned and contextual changes and opportunities. The applicant 
should propose preliminary metrics and a methodology to collect and interpret key data that 
engages program stakeholders in collaborating, learning, and adapting. 

 

d.4 Local Ownership and Sustainability 

 

The applicant should describe how it will empower a broad range of local actors at every phase of 
program implementation; seek to institutionalize collective action as a practice and culture; and, if 
the civic incubator concept gains traction, pursue self-sustaining revenue generation strategies. 

 

 

D.6 Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. While 
no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible 
while still providing the necessary details. The Business (Cost) application must include: 1. Cover 
Page; 2. SF 424 Forms; 3. Required Certifications and Assurances; 4. Other Budget Information; 5. 
Prior Approvals; 6. Subawards; 7. D&B/SAM Information; 8. Performance History; 9. Branding and 
Marking; 10. Funding Restrictions; and 11. Conflict of Interest. 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for 
the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. Applicants 
should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below): 

1. Cover Page: 




Please see Subsection D.3 above for requirements. 


2. SF 424 Form(s): 




The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms can 
be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424instructions.html 

Application for 

Federal Assistance (SF-
424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for 
SF424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424ainstructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424binstructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

3. Required Certifications and Assurances: 




The applicant must include the following documents and submit a signed copy as part of the Business 
(Cost) Application: 

 

i. “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
ii. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
iii. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition 
and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

 4. Other Budgetary Information: 

In addition, the following budgetary information should be provided in the Cost Application. 

(i) Guidelines: The following general guidelines apply. 
A. The Cost Application should be for a period of 48 months. 
B. Budget should be stated in US Dollars and the USAID/Ethiopia support 
should total approximately $21,500,103. 
C. Applicants should assume notification of an award as set forth in 
Section B.2. 



(ii) Spreadsheets Required: The following spreadsheets are required: 





A. A Summary Spreadsheet showing the cost for the major cost categories 
identified. 
B. Separate detailed budgets that provides sufficient detailed information at the 
individual cost line item that is sufficient to allow USAID/Ethiopia to determine 
that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found 
in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. The types of costs should be organized based on the cost 
categories specified above in Section D.6 and Annex 1. This budget should contain 
total amounts for each line item of cost for the entire 48-month period (not only 
should the total amount of dollars over 48 months for each cost line item be 
included but the cumulative number of units – days, trips, months etc. should also 
be summed). 
C. Separate sheets that breakdown the costs specified in Subsection B above to each 
of the four program years. NOTE: Applicants can alternatively include the detailed 
cost breakdown per year in the overall 48-month summary described above. 


(iii) Spreadsheet Format: The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected 




Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) with visible formulas and references 
and must be broken out by project year, including itemization of the federal and 
non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise 
inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to review the application, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. 

 

(iv) Sub-contracts/Sub-agreements: The budget shall include a summary and breakdown 
of the costs allocated for each sub-recipient or sub-contractor involved in the activity 
(unless the agreement or contract is on a fixed amount basis). While it is preferred that 
detailed subcontract or sub-agreement costs be included in the overall detailed 
spreadsheet(s) described above, applicants have the option of including separate sub-
agreement or subcontract budgets for the sake of clarity. 
(v) Budget Notes: Budget notes are required. These budget notes must provide an 
accompanying narrative by line item which explains in detail the basis for how the 
individual line-item costs were derived. The budget notes must be sufficient to ensure 
that USAID/ can determine the purpose of every cost item proposed, as well as 
understand the basis for the cost estimate (units and unit cost). 
(vi) Budget Categories: The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories 
and information, at a minimum and provides guidance on budget category costs. 
A. Salaries – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, 
level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. The Budget 
Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the 
services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written 
policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not 
address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget 
Narrative must describe the rationale used and support market research. 






B. Fringe Benefits & Allowances – If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved 
by an agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide 
evidence of its approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate 
approved, the applicant must propose a rate and explain how the applicant 
determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a detailed 
breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and 
the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 




Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by 
position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

C. Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, 
and the duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based 
on the applicant’s normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide 
supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, and 
explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 
D. Equipment and Supplies – Must include information on estimated types of 
equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and quantity. The Budget 
Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the basis for 
the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs 
and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, 
if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 




NOTE: In accordance with 2CFR 200, “Equipment” means tangible personal 
property (including information technology systems) having a useful life of more 
than one year and a per-unit acquisition cost which equals or exceeds the lesser of 
the capitalization level established by the non-Federal entity for financial 
statement purposes, or $5,000. All equipment must be listed in a separate 
budget line item. 

E. Contractual – Must include costs of direct program activities, monitoring, 
evaluation, and learning costs, Consultants, Training, workshops, monitoring, 
evaluation and learning costs, conferences, campaigns, consultants, sub awards 
and other direct program implementation costs. Specify the budget for the portion 
of the program to be passed through to any subrecipient. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 
The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as the applicant’s 
budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. The applicant should 
indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with 
estimates of costs. 
F. Construction – NOT APPLICABLE 
G. Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such 
as report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and 
inoculations, equipment rental, office rent, utilities, communication, maintenance 





or service costs, costs associated with implementation of Branding and Marking 
Plan, costs for services not part of the technical scope/delivery of the award (i.e. 
logistical support services) as well as any other miscellaneous costs which directly 
benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The Budget Narrative must support 
the necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: 
rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; 
alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the 
property leased. 
H. Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs 
or will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please 
see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. The application must identify which approach 
they are requesting and provide the applicable supporting information. Below are 
the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 




Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG 

Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit 
your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was 
issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the 
approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate 
may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s 
Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA Initial Application 
Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs, 
but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this 
methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until 
such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the 
non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which 
cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further 
information. 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, 
but approval is at the discretion of the Agreement Officer Initial Application 
Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and 
estimates for the current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive 
officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are 
identifiable to more than one program or activity, such 



as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and 
telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently 
across all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of 
that particular cost to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 
10% de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and 
may request additional supporting information, including financial statements and 
audits, should the application still be under consideration after the merit review. 
USAID is under no obligation to approve the applicant’s requested method. 

 

 Prior Approvals in Accordance with 2 CFR 200.407: 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for 
prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost 
elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the applicant must 
specify and justify that cost in this Section. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost 
elements require prior written approval. 

 

5. Approval of Subawards: 


 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time of 
award in this Section. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

• Name of organization 
• Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) Number 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s 


Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 

• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for mitigation. 


 

7. Unique Entity Identifier and SAM Requirements: 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifiers (formerly DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. 
Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding 
agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid UEI number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients. 



2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make 
the process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov ). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during 
which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a Federal 
awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by the time 
USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not qualified to receive 
an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another applicant. 

 

UEI number and SAM registration: www.SAM.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.SAM.gov navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

Applicants should address the status of these registrations in this section. 

 

8. History of Performance: 


 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its cost-
reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, not 
to exceed three (3) as follows. 

 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its cost-
reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, that 
have been awarded or completed in the last three years, as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization. 

• Award Number. 

• Activity Title. 

• A brief description of the activity. 

• Period of Performance. 

• Award Amount. 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at the 
organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information including 
telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information on 
its performance. USAID/Ethiopia reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its review 
of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award survey 
if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

9. Branding Strategy and Marking Plan: 


 


The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan to 
be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting award. 

 

Pursuant to ADS 303.3.6.2.f and ADS 320.3.1.2, the applicant is required to submit a Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan in this Section of the Business (Cost) Application. These plans shall be 
prepared in accordance with the guidance in ADS 320.3.1.2, 2 CFR 700.16 and the references therein. 

 

USAID/Ethiopia does not intend to make an award without an approved Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan. The following pre-award terms in ADS 303mba entitled “Branding Strategy – 
Assistance” and “Marking Plan – Assistance” are relevant: 

 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding Strategy," 
describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it is promoted 
and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement 
Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement 
or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, 
stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 




 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 




 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID logo 
and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the USAID Web 
site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the NOFO or APS states that 
the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or 
tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or with) 
the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when 
acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the program or 
project. 







(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that competes 
with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to consistently identify 
this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI of the 
NOFO or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute 
logo, seal, or tagline. 


(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 




 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 




 

(i) Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service announcements, 
billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 
country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so forth. 
Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, 






 “USAID is from the American People.” 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support 
this project or program. 






 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, including 
any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 




 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and related 
materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if they 
will receive the same prominence as USAID. 




 

e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data 
submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 


 

2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that will 
visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brand mark, with the 
tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency and 
is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the NOFO or APS 
will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to 
the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 


c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement 
Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement 
or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce, and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 




 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature. 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, 
media, or communications products funded by USAID. 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief programs; 
and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, fairs, 
workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot be 
displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of the 
American people. 






 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 




 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity. 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
Deliverables. 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and 
where the applicant will place the marking. 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID Identity, 
and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 






 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of why 
the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking 
requirements would: 




 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 
goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 







presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be independent. The applicant must explain why each 
particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each particular 
item or product is better positioned as a host-country government item or product. 






(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item or 
commodity would impair its functionality. 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would not be 
cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must identify 
the relevant norm and explain why marking would violate that norm or otherwise be 
inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international law 
violated by the marking. 






 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the 
above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 
applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved exemptions, 
will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, and will apply for 
the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 


 

10. Funding Restrictions: 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance 
in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. Applicants will be reimbursed 
only for costs that benefit the program description and are allocable, allowable and reasonable. Pre-
award costs may be reimbursed under the resulting award, but only with the prior specific written 
approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

This program does not have any provision for capital funding or any type of construction assistance. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the Agreement Officer, all commodities and 
services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic 
code specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

The Applicant should address any issues with these funding restrictions in this Section of the Business 
(Cost) Application. 

 

11. Conflict of Interest: 

 

The Applicant should disclose any conflicts of interest pursuant to the following pre-award term: 


 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. 
The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal 
considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and 
duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. Should the 
applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the application, 
the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the Agreement Officer no later than ten (10) 
calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware of 
that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this financial 
assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not limited to 
situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-public information 
regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s employee was 
substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. USAID will 
promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification from the applicant. 

 

 12) Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain 
Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (November 2020) 

FOR U.S. ORGANIZATIONS 

Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and Video 
Surveillance Services or Equipment (November 2020) 

USAID has been granted a temporary waiver under Section 889(d)(2) that will allow the recipient to 
use award funds through September 30, 2022, to procure certain telecommunications and video 
surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR 200.216. Based on this waiver, all costs 
incurred for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment will be 
allowable through September 30, 2022, without regard to the cost principle at 2 CFR 200.471. 
Procurements made on or after October 1, 2022, will be unallowable in accordance with 2 CFR 200.471. 

FOR NON-U.S. ORGANIZATIONS 

Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (July 
2022) 


 a. In accordance with the cost principles in 2 CFR § 200.471, obligating or expending costs for covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment or services as described in 2 CFR § 
200.216 are unallowable. Recipients and subrecipients are prohibited from using award funds, including 
direct and indirect costs, cost share and program income, for such covered telecommunications and 
video surveillance services or equipment. This provision 07/01/2022 Partial Revision 42 Text 
highlighted in yellow indicates that the material is new or substantively revised. implements temporary 
waivers granted to USAID under Section 889(d)(2) that allow the recipient to use award funds for: 

(1) All costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment incurred 
through September 30, 2022; and 

(2) Costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment incurred on or 
after October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2028, only if the recipient has determined that there is no 
available alternate eligible source for the covered telecommunications and video surveillance services 
or equipment. 

 

b. After September 30, 2028, in accordance with 2 CFR § 200.471 costs of all covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR § 200.216 will 
be unallowable. 

c. The Recipient must include this provision in all subawards and contracts issued under this award. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

 

E.1 Criteria 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all applications 
will be evaluated. 

 

The Technical Application will be scored by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in 
this section. 

 

E.2 Review and Selection Process 

 

The required format and content for the application are described in Section D. The applications will be 
evaluated using an adjectival rating system, in accordance with the selection criteria set forth below. 
USAID will collaborate with the apparently successful applicant(s) to create a final Program Description 
that will be included in the award. Prior to negotiating an actual award, the Agreement Officer will 
review the apparently successful applicant(s) budget to ensure that costs, including cost sharing (not 
required but encouraged), are in compliance with OMB’s and USAID’s policies. The costs proposed 
must be determined to be reasonable, based on the Cost Application and other information, before award 
can be made. Award will be made to the responsible applicant whose application is determined to be the 
best, based on the criteria specified in this NOFO. The Agreement Officer must also evaluate the risk of 
the apparently successful applicant(s) and is charged with the final determination of whether to make an 
award to the apparently successful applicant(s). Among other issues, the apparently successful 
applicant(s) history of performance will be reviewed using the reference information contained in the 
Technical Application, along with any other information deemed relevant by the Agreement Officer or 
Selection Committee. The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally obligate the U.S. 
Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be 
incurred before receipt of either an Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer or a specific, written 
authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions in this 
NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following criteria shown in 
descending order of importance: 

 

MERIT REVIEW CRITERION 

 

The evaluation of applications will be completed using the following merit review criterion: 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CRITERION 

 CRITERION NAME 

Importance 

Criterion 1 

Understanding of the Context and Soundness of 
Technical Approach 

Most Important 

Criterion 2 

Quality of Management and Staffing Approach 

Second Most 
Important 

Criterion 3 

Soundness of Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning Approach 

Third Most 
Important 

Criterion 4 

Local Ownership and Sustainability 

Fourth Most 
Important 



 

Criterion 1 - Understanding of the Context and Soundness of Technical Approach 

 

This criterion will be evaluated to the extent to which the application articulates an 
understanding of Ethiopia’s current civic space, including existing mechanisms for 
civic/citizen participation in Ethiopia’s national, regional, and local governance processes; 
and opportunities/entry points for expanding meaningful civic engagement, voice, and 
collective action (with a special focus on women, youth, people with disabilities, and other 
marginalized groups). The application must also demonstrate the clarity, quality, and viability 
of the applicant’s technical approach (strategy, methodology, and implementation plan) 
including: 

 

● The applicant’s approach(es) to experimentation, learning and adaptation, particularly 
when supporting new civic actors such as social movements, youth groups, and social 
entrepreneurs 
● The feasibility, sustainability, and innovation of the technical approach and proposed 
activities in support of locally led partnerships, civic networks, and collective action 
on locally defined priorities 
● The applicant’s approach to leveraging other donor investments in civil society, social 
accountability, and good governance; and to cooperating and collaborating with other 
relevant USAID/Ethiopia programs 


 

Criterion 2 - Quality of Management and Staffing Approach 

 

This criterion will be evaluated to the extent to which the application demonstrates: 1) 
Clarity of roles and responsibilities for each proposed key technical position and 
appropriateness of technical/professional experience qualifications; 2) Efficiency and 
effectiveness of the proposed organizational structure and staffing patterns of the Addis 
office and two regional hubs; and 3) Strategy for inclusive recruitment (women, youth, ethnic 
diversity). 

 

Criterion 3 - Soundness of Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Approach 


 

This criterion will be evaluated to the extent to which the application demonstrates: 1) 
clarity, feasibility, and comprehensiveness of applicant’s approach to MEL; and 2) 
commitment to and methodology for CLA and joint learning with Ethiopian partners and 
stakeholders. 

 

Criterion 4 - Local Ownership and Sustainability 

 

This criterion will be evaluated to the extent to which application reflects: 1) the articulation 
of a viable approach to empower a broad range of local actors - with a special focus on youth, 
women, and other marginalized groups - at every phase of program implementation; 2) a 
strategy for institutionalizing collective action as a practice and culture for civic engagement; 
and 3) a strategy to make civic incubators financially sustainable assuming proof of concept. 

 

b. Business (Cost) Review 

 

USAID will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award as a 
result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the 
cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial aspects of 
the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; (2) 
whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable economy and 
efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 
200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. entities, or the 
Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient has 
the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial resources, and 
technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and 
comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, 
the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 
CFR 200.207). 

 

c. Pre-Award: Oral Presentation/Revised Full Application Submission (ONLY applies to those 
Applicant(s) selected). 

 

Revised full Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted as instructed by the Agreement 
Officer. 

 

[END OF SECTION E]


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1. Federal Award Notices 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been appropriated, 
allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID/Ethiopia anticipates that 
these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby notified of these 
requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

The Cooperative Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document, which shall 
be transmitted to the Recipient for countersignature to the authorized agent of the successful 
organization(s) electronically, to be followed by original copies for execution. 

 

Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful applicants pursuant to ADS 303.3.7.1.b. 
USAID/ will consider requests for additional information pursuant to ADS 303.3.7.2. 

 

F.2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following policies 
and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for 
U.S. Non-governmental organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

F.3. Reporting Requirements 

 

Below are the reporting requirements under the Civic Engagement cooperative agreement: that include: 

a. Activity planning 


Activity planning reports cover the reports that are critical to USAID/Ethiopia’s ability to be 
substantially involved in this Activity. These include annual work plans and monitoring, evaluation and 
learning plans. 

1. Work Plans 


The work plan is intended to express the Recipient and USAID/Ethiopia’s plan to implement the 
Activity. The work plan authorizes specific activities to implement the Activity Description. The 
Recipient shall submit to the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) one electronic copy of 
the draft annual work plan within 90 days of the agreement, covering the first year period of 
performance. The work plan, complemented by budget narratives, should explain the rationale, 
sequence and timeline of activities that will be implemented during that fiscal year and provide 
additional information determined to be relevant by the AOR. USAID will review the draft annual work 


plan and provide comments/suggestions. 

The Recipient shall then submit one electronic copy of the final year one work plan to the USAID AOR 
for approval not later than 15 days from receipt of USAID’s comments/suggestions. The Recipient shall 
also submit one copy of the final approved year one work plan to the Agreement Officer. The Recipient 
shall submit one electronic copy of subsequent draft revisions and updates to the work plan to the AOR 
annually. The Recipient shall report any significant work plan changes or revisions to the AOR and 
shall obtain the AOR’s approval prior to implementing or undertaking such changes or revisions. Work 
plans and changes/revisions thereto must be within the scope of the Activity Description as specified 
in the award. Work plans and changes thereto shall describe activities to be conducted during the period 
at a greater level of detail than the Activity Description but shall not serve to change the Program 
Description in any way. 

The Recipient must ensure that the Annual Work Plan (AWP) appropriately reflects activity objectives 
and the program description. The AWP should detail the work to be accomplished during the upcoming 
year. All work plan activities must be within the scope of the award. The AWP will serve as a guide for 
activity implementation–a demonstration of links between interventions and objectives in accordance 
with the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan. The AWP must outline key activities and 
the expected results to be accomplished for that year and will be negotiated and shared with key 
stakeholders for comments as appropriate. The AWP should also include the individual country 
strategies, which should be updated annually as part of the work planning process. The AWP will also 
serve as a basis for budget estimates for that year of program implementation. A budget with sufficient 
detail to allow the AOR to judge the efficiency of the implementation plan should be included. The 
AWP should delineate an overall budget by line item and a budget per objective and activity. The AWP 
may be revised on an occasional basis in the course of implementation, as needed, to reflect changes 
on the ground with the concurrence of the AOR. 

b. Performance Reporting 


Performance monitoring reporting is intended to ensure that USAID has sufficient information to 
effectively monitor the Activity’s performance. This includes progress on planned activities, and 
achievements and any information regarding any development that may have a significant impact on 
performance, including, but not limited to challenges encountered, and relevant context. It includes 
information on costs incurred compared to the approved budget plan for the Agreement. 

1. Quarterly Progress Reports 


The Quarterly Progress reports shall include the following information: i) a summary of activities and 
key achievements; ii) describe progress made during the reporting period actual achievements of the 
quarter against plans; and iii) assess overall progress to date against: performance indicators agreed 
upon, and the planned outputs for the quarter in the annual implementation plan. 

 

2. Quarterly Expenditure Reports 


The Recipient will submit a brief, separate quarterly Expenditure Report to USAID within 30 calendar 


days after the end of each quarter of the fiscal year during the performance period. The Expenditure 

3. Annual Technical Performance Reports 


The Recipient will submit annual reports to USAID within 30 calendar days after the end of the 
reporting period. In this regard, the USAID’s annual reporting time covers the period from October 1 
to September 30. At a minimum, Annual Performance Reports shall contain the information listed 
below: 

a) A comparison of the planned activities and results during the reporting period compared 
with the plan established for the reporting period; including success stories 

b) A summary of funds expended during the fiscal year by funding source; 

c) An explanation of why results were surpassed or were not achieved and why activities 
were delayed or not carried out during the reporting period. Indicate corrective actions taken 
or a plan to ameliorate or change performance if appropriate. For each corrective action, the 
Recipient will designate responsible parties and establish a timeframe for completion; 

d) Information on accrued expenditures to date; and 

e) A listing of all sub-agreements, including a scope of work with detailed descriptions of 
the related program, in which the Recipient is engaged during the annual reporting period. 

f) A summary of lessons learned and summative answers to USAID Project 1 Learning 
Questions 

g) Information on major challenges and constraints faced during the performance period 
being reported; and 

h) Summary of next year’s plans. 

i) The annual report must include a professionally formatted, four-to-eight page annual 
summary of achievements, noteworthy activities, lessons learned, changes in the 
environment, etc. The summary must be formatted to function as a stand-alone, externally 
shareable document, designed to keep key project stakeholders (such as USG agencies, other 
donors, and other USG implementers) up to date on progress. The summary must include 
photos, maps, tables, and other graphical elements as relevant. The annual summary must not 
directly recycle text, photos or other elements from quarterly summaries. 

Upon receiving AOR approval, the approved Annual Report shall be submitted to the USAID’s DEC. 
Details on the requirements for the Annual Progress Reports will be provided in the award document. 

c. Financial Reporting 


Recipients of USAID funding must submit the Federal Financial Form (FFR) (SF-425) on a quarterly 
basis via electronic format to the AOR and USAID Ethiopia’s Financial Management Office. Details 
on requirements for submission of the financial reports will be included in the award document. 

d. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 


The Recipient must submit a draft life-of-project ME &L Plan with the application. The Recipient will 


work closely with the AOR to establish indicators, as well as baseline data and performance targets for 

 

e. Branding and Marking Plan 


The Recipient shall submit a branding and marking plan consistent with USAID Ethiopia branding and 
marking provisions. The final version of Branding and Marking Plan will be due with the Application. 

 

f. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 


The Recipient should apply geospatial methods using GIS technology to support USAID’s effort to 
incorporate geographic data and analysis into USAID’s overall development planning, design, and 
monitoring & evaluation. Geographic data collection, analysis, and submission methods should be 
included in the ME&L and the work plan. 

 

g. Final Report 


The Final Performance Report will cover the entire period of the award. The Recipient shall submit a 
draft of the final report to the AOR within 90 days following the estimated completion date of the 
cooperative agreement. The details of the final report requirements will be included in the award 
document. The Recipient shall submit one electronic copy of the final Performance Report to USAID’s 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). The Recipient shall submit to the AO and the AOR 
and to one of the following: 

● Via E-mail: DocSubmit@usaid.gov; 
● Via Fax: (202) 216-3515; or 


Online: http://dec.usaid.gov 

 

h. Closeout Plan 


The Recipient will be requested to provide a closeout plan for all activities (administration, 
information, finance, procurement and management) for review and approval, no less than 90 days 
before the end date of the Cooperative Agreement. The Recipient shall submit a draft of the final 
report to the AOR 45 days following the estimated completion date of the Activity. 

 

i. Submission to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications 


 

Per ADS 540.3.2.3, documents and development assistance activity descriptions produced or funded 
with USAID resources and created in support of Intellectual Work must be submitted for inclusion in 
the DEC. The recipient must provide the AOR one copy of any Intellectual Work that is published, and 
a list of any Intellectual Work that is not published. 

 


In addition, the recipient must submit Intellectual Work, whether published or not, to the DEC, either 
on-line (preferred) or by mail. The recipient must review the DEC Web site for submission instructions, 
including document formatting and the types of documents to submit. Submission instructions can be 
found at: http://dec.usaid.gov. For purposes of submissions to the DEC, Intellectual Work includes all 
works that document the implementation, evaluation, and results of international development assistance 
activities developed or acquired under this award, which may include program and communications 
materials, evaluations and assessments, information products, research and technical reports, progress 
and performance reports required under this award (excluding administrative financial information), and 
other reports, articles and papers prepared by the recipient under the award, whether published or not. 
The term does not include the recipient’s information that is incidental to award administration, such as 
financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management information. 

 

Each document submitted should contain essential bibliographic information, such as 1) descriptive title; 
2) author(s) name; 3) award number; 4) sponsoring USAID office; 5) development objective; and 6) 
date of publication. 

 

The recipient must not submit to the DEC any financially sensitive information or personally identifiable 
information, such as social security numbers, home addresses and dates of birth. Such information must 
be removed prior to submission. The Recipient must not submit classified documents to the DEC. 

 

In the event award funds are used to underwrite the cost of publishing, in lieu of the publisher assuming 
this cost as is the normal practice, any profits or royalties up to the amount of such cost must be credited 
to the award unless the schedule of the award has identified the profits or royalties as program income. 

 

F.4. Program Income 

 

If it is expected that program income might be generated under this program, then program income 
earned under the resulting award shall be added to the program and used to further eligible program 
objectives as agreed upon by USAID. Applicants should describe how program income might be 
generated under the proposed activities and how it envisions program income being utilized to 
successfully accomplish program objectives. Program Income, if any, will be accounted for in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. organizations or the Standard Provision entitled Program 
Income for non-U.S. organizations. 

 

F.5. Environmental Compliance 

 

In accordance with USAID policies and procedures related to environmental compliance ADS-
Chapter 204, the Democracy and Governance Office developed a Request for a Categorical Exclusion 
(RCE) for the USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity. The RCE was approved by the Africa 
Bureau Environmental Officer on 04/05/2022 and remains valid until 2027. Pursuant 22 CFR 216.2(c) 
(2), the approved RCE gave a Categorical Exclusion Determination for all interventions under the 
USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement Activity. Categorical Exclusions are recommended for the 
following classes of activities, except to the extent that the activities directly affect the environment 
(such as construction of facilities). Specifically, this is for activities covered by the following citations 
in Reg. 216, subparagraph 22 CFR 216.2(c)(2): 

● §216.2(c)(2)(i) Education, technical assistance, or training programs except to the extent such 
programs include activities directly affecting the environment (such as construction of 
facilities, etc.) 



● §216.2(c)(2)(iii) Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings; 
● §216.2(c)(2)(v) Document and information transfers 
● §216.2(c)(2)(xiv) for activities intended to develop the capacity of recipient countries 


Moreover, a climate risk assessment was conducted for the USAID/Ethiopia Civic Engagement 
Activity. The climate risk analysis gave a “LOW” climate risk. Accordingly, no further environmental 
assessment and climate risk management is required for this activity. 

 

F.6. Other Requirements 

 

Success Stories/Events During the performance of this activity for each project component, some 
special reporting may be required from the Recipient such as a brief paragraph on note-worthy 
activities and events, successes stories etc. The success stories/events should be written to reach a 
broad audience, both inside and outside of USAID/Ethiopia, and should be provided in English. 
Mandatory photo captions and credit should be included with the success stories/events. 

 

 [END OF SECTION F] 

 

 


 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

G.1. Points of contact (POC): 

 

See Section D.1 for Points of Contact (POC) for questions while this NOFO is open. 

 

G.2. The Agreement Officer Representative (AOR): 

 

The AOR for this Award is TBD and will be designated after the Award. 

 

 

G.3. Different contacts for distinct kinds of help, 

 

For technical assistance related to Grants.gov, applicants may contact Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or 
via email at support@grants.gov 

 

 [END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement Officer is 
the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. Any 
award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of funds and continued 
relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used by the 
U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole 
or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made as 
a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 

Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the 
resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information 
contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 

 

[END OF SECTION H]


ANNEX 1 – BUDGET FORMATS 

 

SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 ARA Total Estimated Amount (TEA) 

Civic Engagement Core Budget Categories 

 Year 1 

 Year 
2 

 Year 
3 

 Year 
4 

 Total All 
Years 

1. Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

a. International Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Local In-Country Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Fringe Benefits and 
Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Total 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

a. International travel 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Local and domestic 
travel 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 




a. Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

5. Contractual (Program 
Implementation) 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Direct Program activities 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Training 

 

 

 

 

 

 c. MEL costs 

 

 

 

 

 

d. Consultants 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Subgrants 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Contractual/Program 
Implementation 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Equipment operation 
costs 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Insurance/Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

c. Office operation costs 

 

 

 

 

 

d. Communication costs 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Other 

 

 

 

 

 




Total Other Direct 

Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Indirect Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Material Handling 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Overhead 

 

 

 

 

 

c. G&A 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTALS (Direct and 
indirect costs) 

 

 

 

 

Approximately 

$21,500,103 



 

 

 


 DETAILED BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Please include all detailed costs under the following cost categories and subcategories. 

 

Civic Engagement Core Budget Categories 

 Year 
1 

 Year 
2 

 Year 
3 

 Year 
4 

 Total All 
Years 

1. 

 

Personnel 

a. International Staff 

i. Expatriate Staff 
ii. HQ Technical Staff 


b. Local In-Country Staff 

i. Program 
Staff ii. 
Operational 
Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

2. 

 

Fringe Benefits and Allowances 

a. Fringe Benefits 
b. Allowances 


 

 

 

 

 

3. 

 Travel 

a. International travel 
b. Local and domestic travel (car 
rental, taxis etc.) 


 

 

 

 

 

 




4. 

Equipment and Supplies 

a. Equipment (equipment with a 
unit cost greater than $5,000) 
b. Supplies (equipment with a unit 
cost less than $5,000, including 
but not limited to workstations 
& chairs, file cabinets, 
computers, cellular phones, 
printers, etc.). This cost 
category does not include office 
supplies, which should be 
included under Miscellaneous 
Direct Costs. 


 

 

 

 

 

5. 

Contractual 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

Direct Program activities (including 
fixed-price, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

but not cost type, subcontracts). 

 

 

 

 

 

b. 

Training 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

MEL costs 

 

 

 

 

 

d. 

Consultants (including but not 
limited to expatriate consultants, 
local consultants, studies, 
analyses, etc.) 

 

 

 

 

 




e. 

Subgrants 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. 

 Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

Equipment operation costs (e.g. 
including, but not limited to, vehicle 
rental/lease, vehicle and equipment 
maintenance/fuel/repair, motorcycle 
fuel/maintenance, generator 
fuel/maintenance, software licenses) 

 

 

 

 

 

b. 

Insurance/Travel (e.g. DBA, Medevac, 
visas, permits, immunizations, exams, 
vehicle insurance, equipment insurance, 
other insurance) 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

Office operation costs (e.g. 

rent/utilities/repairs/maintenance, security 
services, office supplies, make ready 
costs) 

 

 

 

 

 

d. 

Communication costs (e.g. general 
communications expense, mobile/cellular 
communication, internet, 
printing/photocopying, courier) 

 

 

 

 

 

e. 

Other (e.g. professional fees – 
audit/legal/payroll, branding & marking, 
banking fees) 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 




7. Indirect Charges 

a. Material Handling 
b. Overhead 
c. G&A 


 

 

 

 

 

TOTALS (Direct and indirect costs) 

 

 

 

 

Approximately 
$21,500,103 



 


 

ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that is 
selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as applicable” 
Standard Provisions: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. NONGOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 

(Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA4. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

X 

RAA5. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 

SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA6. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 

(APRIL 1998) 

 

X 

RAA7. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

X 

RAA8. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING 
COUNTRY 

TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

X 

RAA9. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA10. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS 
(JUNE 1999) 

 

 X 

RAA11. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA12. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 




X 

 

RAA13. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL 

CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA14. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 

(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA16. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 

LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 

TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA17. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 

 X 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 

USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 

(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

X 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 

FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS 
TO 

PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 

PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA22. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 

MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

X 

 

RAA23. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA24. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA25. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 

SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

X 

 

RAA26. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 

RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA27. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 

AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

X 

RAA28. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 

2017) 



 

 

 


 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 
Required 

 Not 

Required 

 Standard Provision 

TBD 

 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 

AGREEMENT (NICRA) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) 

(JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA5. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 

MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

X 

 

RAA6. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA7. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA8. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA9. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA10. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA11. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA12. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

X 

 

RAA13. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA 14. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA15. PROGRAM INCOME (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA16. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 

 

 

CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 




X 

 

RAA17. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID 

ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 
2004) 

 X 

 

RAA18. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS 

(JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 

PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 

PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA22. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 

SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA23. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 

(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA24. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA25. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 

LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 

TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA26. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 

2014) 

X 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 

RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 

INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

X 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 



 

 [END OF PROVISION] 

 

[END OF RFA NO.: 72066322RFA00006] 

 

 

 

 

 


