Issue Date: October 08, 2021 
Deadline for Questions: October 25, 2021, 12:00 pm GMT 
Concept Submission Deadline: November 17, 2021, 12:00 pm GMT 
Deadline for Full Application Submission: March 1, 2022, 12:00 pm GMT 

Federal Assistance Listing Number: 98.001 

SUBJECT: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number 72066922RFA00001 

Program Title: Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) through its Mission in 
Liberia, is seeking applications for a cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement 
the Countywide Sanitation Activity. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

USAID intends to fund one award to maximize development impact and efficient resource use 
by engaging in new, or expanding existing, partnerships in priority areas identified in the 
program description. The program intends to adopt and scale innovative solutions in meeting the 
identified development challenges. USAID/Liberia intends to award to the applicant(s) who best 
meets the objectives of this funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in 
this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application 
are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, 
application submission requirements and selection process. This NOFO will follow a four-phase 
process: 

Phase 1: Submission of Concept Paper 
Phase 2: Participation in Oral Presentations for selected applicant(s) 
Phase 3: Participation in Co-creation Workshop for selected applicant(s) 
Phase 4: Submission of Full Application 

Phase 1 is the submission of a Concept Paper that will be reviewed for responsiveness to the 
purposes of this NOFO and evaluated in accordance with the evaluation criteria provided in 
Section E. Successful applicants will advance to Phase 2, which is an invitation to participate in 
an oral presentation to the Mission, which will be evaluated in accordance with criteria provided 
in Section E. The Apparently Successful Applicant identified in Phase 2 will be invited to 
participate in Phase 3, which is a co-creation workshop. Others with expertise in relevant 
technical areas may also be invited to join the co-creation workshop. Following the co-creation 
process in Phase 3, the Apparently Successful Applicant (individual organizations and/or 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

consortia) will advance to Phase 4 and be requested to submit a Full Application as provided in 
section D and will be evaluated in accordance with the criteria provided in Section E. 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.g. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, 
applicants are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be 
furnished to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to 
www.grants.gov. 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are 

submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the 
applicant’s 

expense. 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

Sincerely, 

Rukmal S. Perera 
Agreement Officer, 
USAID/Liberia 

Page 2 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Section A – 
Program Description 
Section B – 
Federal Award Information 
Section C – 
Eligibility Information 
Section D – 
Application and Submission Information 
Section E – 
Application Review Information 
Section F – 
Federal Award Administration Information 
Section G – 
Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 
Section H – 
Other Information 

Page 3 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award (s) will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – 
Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 

supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

Countywide Sanitation Activity 

1. Introduction 
Under this NOFO, USAID/Liberia’s Health Office will seek to sustainably eliminate open 

defecation in five counties. The County Sanitation activity will implement a comprehensive 
county-wide approach to eliminating open defecation that includes increasing access to basic 
sanitation services, focusing on improved sanitation governance, adoption of improved sanitation 
behaviors, strengthened sanitation markets, and increased local financing for sanitation. 

2. Background and Context 
Liberians have especially poor access to clean water and sanitation compared to other countries in 
the region, which contributes to poor child health outcomes. In Liberia, one out of every eleven 
children die before reaching his or her fifth birthday, with diarrhea as one of the leading causes of 
mortality. Three out of ten Liberian children are moderately stunted and one out of ten is severely 
stunted1. 

2.1 Sanitation in Liberia 
The Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) “service ladders”for WASH are conceptual 

frameworks developed by the WHO and UNICEF that are used as a standardized way of 
measuring WASH service levels across countries. People on the lowest rungs of each ladder 
face the biggest health risks. 

1 Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS), Ministry of Health and Social 
Welfare[Liberia], and ICF. 2020. Liberia Demographic and Health Survey 2019-20: 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR362/FR362.pdf 

Page 4 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 


As of 2020, only about 23.8% of Liberians had access to basic sanitation services, including 
35.0% of residents in urban areas and just 8.7% of residents in rural areas. An estimated 34.8% 
of the population practices open defecation, including 15.6% of urban residents and 60.7% of 
rural residents. Prevalence of open defecation in Liberia is extremely high—over twice the 
regional average. Although open defecation is most prevalent in rural areas, about 25% of the 
total number of people who practice open defecation in Liberia live in urban or peri-urban areas. 

Almost no one in Liberia receives what would qualify as a “safely managed” service, in which 

wastewater is safely treated on-site or through a wastewater treatment facility. As population 
density continues to increase in both urban and rural settings, the health impact of open 
defecation or unimproved sanitation facilities will continue to worsen. 

Since 2000, access to basic sanitation services in urban areas in Liberia has increased only 
slightly from 25.3% in 2000 to 27.7% in 2017. Meanwhile, the percentage of people in urban 
areas who practice open defecation has decreased from 27.9% in 2000 to 15.6% in 2020. 
However, due to population growth, the total number of people practicing open defecation in 
urban areas has remained relatively constant since 2000, as shown in the graph below. The graph 
also shows that the total number of people in urban areas who used an unimproved sanitation 
facility has remained relatively constant since 2000, even while the number of people who use 
limited or basic sanitation services is slowly increasing. As of 2019, about 465,000 people in 
urban areas of Liberia practiced open defecation. 

Page 5 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 


In rural areas of Liberia, access to basic sanitation services remains extremely low, even though 
it has increased slightly from 4.1% in 2000 to 5.9% in 2017. The percentage of people living in 
rural areas who practice open defecation remains extremely high, although it did decrease from 
76.6% in 2000 to 60.4% in 2017. Despite the small decrease in the overall percentage of people 
practicing open defecation in rural areas, due to population growth the total number of people 
practicing open defecation has actually increased slightly since 2000, as shown in the graph 
below. As of 2019, over 1.4 million people were practicing open defecation in rural areas of 
Liberia. 


As of 2018, over 1.8 million people practiced open defecation in Liberia, or about 35% of the 
total population. Prevalence of open defecation in Liberia is extremely high—over twice the 
regional average. Although open defecation is most prevalent in rural areas, about 25% of the 
total number of people who practice open defecation in Liberia live in urban or peri-urban areas. 
As population density continues to increase in both urban and rural settings, the health impact of 
open defecation or unimproved sanitation facilities will continue to worsen. 

A combined lack of clean drinking water, lack of sanitation facilities, and lack of handwashing 
facilities leave Liberians at great risk of both water-borne diseases and diseases spread through 
fecal-oral transmission. Common diseases that result from poor WASH conditions include 
diarrhea and intestinal worms. 

Page 6 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Liberia has one of the highest rates of mortality in the world among children under the age of 
five, with a rate of 93 deaths/1,000 live births.2 As of 2018, UNICEF listed Liberia as the 
country with the 14th-highest level of under-five child mortality in the world. Diarrhea is one of 
the leading causes of child mortality in Liberia. 

Lack of sanitation also affects nutrition, especially among young children. Diarrhea and 
intestinal worms can cause young children to lose nutrients, because nutrients are diverted from 
growth to the immune system to fight the infection. Diarrhea and malnutrition also form a 
vicious cycle, with diarrhea making children more susceptible to malnutrition and malnutrition 
making children more susceptible to diarrhea. Chronic malnourishment during early childhood 

has lasting impacts on a child’s physical and mental development. In Liberia, 30% of children 

under five are stunted (low height for age). Child malnutrition is also a major contributor to 
under-five mortality due to malnourished children’s greater susceptibility to infections and 
slower recoveries from illness. 

Women and girls in Liberia are disproportionately affected by lack of access to sanitation. Their 
needs differ from men in terms of sanitation. In addition to the health benefits, access to a basic 
toilet can help keep women and girls safe from abuse and give them the privacy they need. 
Similarly, women in Liberia also face different barriers than men in terms of their involvement in 
WASH-related professions, such as being a sanitation entrepreneur. 

2.2 Liberia’s WASH Objectives 
The Government of Liberia (GOL) has four major strategic water, sanitation, and hygiene 
(WASH) objectives, as shown below. These objectives are directly related to Intermediate Result 

3.4 under the USAID/Liberia Country Cooperation Development Strategy (CDCS). 
2 2019-2020 Liberia Demographic and Health Survey Key Indicator Report 

Page 7 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

The GOL recently developed a costed roadmap for the elimination of open defecation 
nationwide, which is going through an internal GOL approval process. 

2.3. Previous USAID Sanitation Activities in Liberia 
USAID/Liberia’s past sanitation activities include a smaller investment of $4.5 million over five 
years in community-led total sanitation (CLTS) activities in 1,361 rural communities in three 
counties (Bong, Lofa, and Nimba), resulting in 1,061 communities being certified as open 
defecation free (ODF). The activity also trained some community entrepreneurs on handpump, 
well, and latrine maintenance and repair. 

While CLTS activities have been successful at triggering construction of sanitation facilities and 
achieving initial ODF status, the sustainability of these achievements is a challenge, and 
regression to old behaviors of open defecation is common. The National Public Health Institute 
of Liberia estimates that of the 2,350 communities that were declared ODF between 2009 and 
2019, 43% later reverted to open defecation, often due to poor quality of latrines, an inability to 
maintain and repair latrines, and lack of follow-up after communities achieve ODF status. A 
more sustainable, comprehensive approach to sanitation is therefore needed. 

2.4. Sanitation Markets in Liberia 
The sustainability of previous sanitation activities have been impacted by the lack of a market for 
sanitation products and services. Sanitation markets, shown in the market-based sanitation 
framework below, remain largely unexamined and unsupported in Liberia, but their development 
is critical to the long-term sustainability of sanitation programming. 


Page 8 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

USAID is currently conducting a two-phase sanitation market assessment for Liberia. 
Preliminary phase one results highlight the following key sanitation market barriers: 


In depth phase one preliminary findings are available in Annex 4. The phase two assessment will 
also analyze the role of actors such as masons, hardware stores, sand miners, timber sellers, mud 
brick sellers, aggregate producers, cement wholesalers, plastic manufacturers, and savings and 
loans groups. Findings from phase 2 will be available prior to award. 

3. Activity Description 
3.1 Purpose, Goal, and Objectives 
The goal of the County Sanitation activity is to sustainably eliminate open defecation in five 
counties (Montserrado, Bong, Nimba, Lofa, and Grand Bassa), moving everyone in those 
counties who currently practices open defecation to at least a basic level of sanitation. These five 
counties represent approximately 61% of all the people in Liberia who currently practice open 
defecation. A comprehensive countywide approach should be used to eliminate open defecation 
in both rural and urban areas. 

Page 9 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

3.2 Development Hypothesis 
If sanitation governance is improved, key sanitation behaviors are adopted, sanitation markets 
are strengthened, and financing for sanitation is increased, the open defecation can be sustainably 
eliminated in five counties, with people who previously practiced open defecation achieving at 
least a basic level of sanitation. 

3.3. Results Framework 
3.4. Geographic Focus 
The County Sanitation activity will focus on five counties: Montserrado, Bong, Nimba, Lofa, 
and Grand Bassa. Note that urban areas in the Monrovia area may be excluded, as this activity 
does not intend to focus on interventions such as construction of waste management facilities for 
fecal sludge management that would be necessary in extremely densely populated areas of 
Montserrado. 

3.5 Anticipated Results and Expected Outcomes 
Result 1: Improved sanitation governance 

Governance of the sanitation sector in Liberia is highly centralized, with the Liberia Water and 
Sewer Corporation in charge of maintaining sewer facilities and establishing fees for sewage 
services, and the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Bureau overseeing construction of 
sanitation facilities in rural areas, both operating under the Ministry of Public Works. There is 
often very little financing available for sanitation governance at the county and district levels, 
leaving local officials without the necessary resources to scale up and strengthen CLTS, and to 
continue to conduct the follow-up and monitoring activities necessary to maintain ODF status. 

Lack of financing for sanitation is a challenge at all levels. Very little money from the national 
budget is invested in sanitation, resulting in a lack of resources at the local levels. At the 
household level, there is little incentive for households to invest scarce resources in improved 
sanitation. 

The sanitation sector in Liberia is governed by following statutes and policies: 

1. The Liberia Water and Sewer Corporation (LWSC) Act of 1973 empowers the LWSC to 
provide sanitation services in urban areas 
Page 10 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

2. The Public Health Law 1976 declares absence of sanitary latrines in a public or private 
dwellings, trade places and workplaces to be a “nuisance.”It empowers local authorities 

(including the Commissioner, the town clerk, and the treasurer of the township) to deal 
with the nuisance in lawful and reasonably practicable manner. The remedial action may 
include any or all of the following: 

a. Serving of notice to abate the nuisance 
b. Civil suit for abatement to be instituted by local Authority if notice disregarded 
c. Court may order investigation or abatement of nuisance 
3. The Integrated Water Resource Management Act established WATSAN committees at 
the local level 
4. The Decentralization Act of 2018 empowers local governments to improve sanitation 
situation and construct public latrines 
The key players involved in sanitation regulation and service delivery are the National WASH 
Commission, the Division of Environmental and Occupational Health, and the Ministry of Public 
Works. 

In spite of the regulations and governing bodies that exist on paper, in practice sanitation 
governance is very weak at the national, county, and local levels due to lack of funding, 
coordination, and capacity. There is very little monitoring of and reporting on sanitation 
indicators in Liberia. Improved sanitation governance is crucial to sustainable elimination of 
open defecation and improved access to basic sanitation. 

Intermediate Result (IR) 1.1: Improved national sanitation governance 

Some of the outcomes anticipated under this IR include the following: 

● 
ODF-enabling policies and regulations reformed and implemented, such as regulations 
requiring households to have latrines, environmental policies supportive of sanitation 
including policies around solid waste disposal, improved allocation of roles and 
responsibilities in national sanitation governance, and enforcement mechanisms for 
sanitation policies and regulations 
● 
Sanitation sector coordination mechanisms improved and sustained, including national-
level sanitation working groups and donor coordination groups. This could include a 
program management unit for the County Sanitation activity 
● 
Sanitation sector monitoring and reporting harmonized and regularized, including 
integration of sanitation indicators into the national health management information 
system, improved monitoring and reporting on ODF and sanitation coverage, and regular 
joint sanitation sector reviews involving the Government of Liberia and other 
stakeholders 
● 
Improved capacity of national government and relevant institutions 
IR 1.2: Improved county-level sanitation governance 

Some of the outcomes expected under this IR include the following: 

● 
Improved county-level coordination around sanitation, including donor coordination 
Page 11 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

● 
Institutional triggering for ODF of county-level stakeholders involved in sanitation 
governance and elimination of open defecation 
● 
Improved county-level evidence-based planning and budgeting for sanitation, including 
improved use of sanitation data and evidence during budget planning processes, 
improved coordination of domestic funding and donor funding available for sanitation, 
and improved planning and implementation of sanitation activities. 
● 
Improved ability of county-level authorities to contract and oversee sanitation-related 
construction 
● 
Improved regular community-level monitoring of sanitation activities and outcomes, 
including the integration of sanitation into existing structures for supervision and 
monitoring 
● 
Improved fecal sludge management (FSM) arrangements in urban and rural areas, such as 
working with the government to structure, monitor, and increase financing for FSM. 
● 
Improved capacity of county government and relevant institutions 
Result 2: Key sanitation behaviors adopted 

It is estimated that over 1 million people currently practice open defecation in the five target 
counties. The wide prevalence of open defecation in Liberia points to cultural acceptance of open 
defecation behaviors in many communities. Previous CLTS activities have had success at 
reducing open defecation behaviors and encouraging the construction of household latrines, but 
these latrines often fall into disrepair and disuse within a few years. Key community-level 
sanitation behaviors must therefore include not only the elimination of open defecation, but the 
construction and maintenance of sustainable basic sanitation facilities. 

Since about 25% of the people who practice open defecation live in urban areas, specific 
sanitation strategies (not just CLTS) will be needed for both rural and urban populations and 
tailored to each local context. Recent USAID studies have found that CLTS works best in 
smaller villages, with lower literacy rates, and higher prevalence of diarrhea cases, that are 
further from surface water bodies, and have less access to drinking water sources. 3 Separate or 
modified strategies must be developed for areas outside this description. 

To ensure sustainability, key sanitation behaviors must also include financial behaviors--the 
willingness of households to invest their own resources in constructing and maintaining basic 
sanitation facilities. 

IR 2.1: Open defecation behaviors ended and consistent latrine use increased 

Some of the outcomes anticipated under this IR include the following: 

● 
Increased community and household demand for cleanliness and private household 
latrines (as opposed to community latrines). It is important to increase demand 
3 USAID WASHPaLS, Jan 2021, TARGETING COMMUNITY-LED TOTAL SANITATION (CLTS) TO FAVORABLE CONTEXTS: 
FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE SUCCESS OF CLTS IN LIBERIA available at 
https://www.globalwaters.org/sites/default/files/washpals_clts_performance_envelope_liberia_brief_jan_2021_0 
.pdf 

Page 12 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

specifically for basic sanitation facilities: improved facilities not shared with other 
households. 

● 
Increased willingness and ability of households to invest their own limited funds in 
sanitation. 
● 
ODF established and sustained as a social norm, with specific barriers to ODF addressed. 
● 
Safe emptying and disposal of fecal sludge in support of sustained use of basic sanitation. 
IR 2.2: Latrine construction increased 

Latrine construction specifically refers to improved sanitation facilities not shared with other 
households. Some of the outcomes anticipated under this IR include the following: 

● 
Increased understanding in communities and households of latrine models, benefits, and 
costs, and emptying options as appropriate. 
● 
Established explicit operational policy relating to land tenure and latrine construction 
● 
Increased sales and marketing to households of affordable latrine options. 
● 
Increased enterprise and DIY capacities for sustainable latrine construction. 
Result 3: Sanitation markets strengthened 

The majority of people who practice open defecation in Liberia are very poor, and potential 
sanitation products and solutions will have to take this into account. The recent sanitation market 
assessment found potential for development of a sanitation market in Liberia. 

IR 3.1: Sanitation market information developed and shared 

Some of the outcomes expected under this IR include the following: 

● 
Customer segmentation and market opportunity information developed to hone business 
strategies and encourage more entrepreneurs and businesses to provide sanitation 
products and services 
● 
Research and development of sanitation products and services and their business models 
supported for basic sanitation 
IR 3.2: Enterprise viability enhanced 

Some of the outcomes expected under this IR include the following: 

● 
Business capacities built in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) involved in the 
sanitation market, especially those that can reach rural populations. This could include 
adding sanitation products to already viable businesses such as hardware stores. 
● 
Use of market information by SMEs involved in the sanitation market increased. 
● 
Piloting of products and delivery models, marketing and sales, especially products that 
can be used by poor and rural populations. 
● 
Sanitation Entrepreneur Association is established. 
Page 13 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Result 4: Financing for sanitation increased 

Lack of financing for sanitation is a challenge at all levels. Very little money from the national 
budget is invested in sanitation, resulting in a lack of resources at the local levels. Lack of 
financing for sanitation governance at the county and district levels leaves local officials without 
the necessary resources to implement sanitation activities and to conduct the follow-up and 
monitoring activities necessary to maintain ODF status. At the household level, there is little 
incentive for households to invest scarce resources in improved sanitation. 

Effective sanitation finance can create incentives for rural communities and households to invest 
in sanitation and hygiene improvement and encourage more rapid and sustainable progress up 
the sanitation ladder. Finance options can be designed to reach the most vulnerable populations 
and encourage upgrading and improvement on sanitation services across entire communities. 
Approaches to sanitation finance can include targeted subsidies, incentives, loans, and grants. 
This activity will develop, pilot, evaluate, and support the scaling of promising financing 
approaches. It will also aim to increase overall public expenditures on sanitation. 

IR 4.1: Household and enterprise financing options increased 

Some of the outcomes expected under this IR include the following: 

● 
Increased availability of microfinance and credit options for households to finance 
sanitation. 
● 
Increased access to finance for SMEs who want to offer sanitation products and services 
(either for establishing or expanding a business), especially SMEs that can offer 
sanitation products and services in rural areas and to the poorest households. 
● 
Increased availability of targeted and scalable subsidies for sanitation, to ensure access to 
basic sanitation facilities among the poorest and most vulnerable households. 
IR 4.2: Public sector expenditure on sanitation increased 

Some of the outcomes expected under this IR include the following: 

● 
Management of national and county-level financial resources for sanitation improved, 
including expenditure tracking. 
● 
Increased domestic and private resource mobilization for sanitation by national and 
county governments. 
● 
Leverage, maximize, and coordinate investments with development partners. 
4. Staffing 
Applicants are expected to describe staff positions that are key to successful implementation and 

accomplishment of the goals and objectives described above. USAID’s policy limits the number 

of key positions to no more than five positions or five percent of recipient employees working 
under the award, whichever is greater. Key personnel must have sufficient managerial and 
technical capacity, expertise, and experience to effectively manage and support the overall 
activity and its staff as outlined in the management and staffing plan and responsibilities. 

Page 14 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Applicants must propose at least two key personnel: the Chief of Party and a monitoring and 
evaluation/CLA advisor. All key personnel must have a level of effort of 100%. 

Applicants are expected to propose a mix of key personnel and staff with job descriptions 
designed to best accomplish the goals and objectives of the activity, and whose combined 
qualifications meet the criteria described below. 

● 
Extensive experience in managing and implementing public health, WASH, and 
sanitation activities of the complexity, size and scope of the Countywide Sanitation 
activity (in terms of dollar amount and the number of people managed) 
● 
Extensive experience working in developing countries, preferably in West Africa 
● 
Strong inclusive leadership and management skills, and the ability to lead and manage a 
diverse consortium for success 
● 
Strong ability to effectively coordinate, manage, and deal with diverse stakeholders and 
with differing priorities and perspectives 
● 
Strong interpersonal skills and written and oral communication skills 
● 
Good technical knowledge of sanitation, approaches to ODF, and approaches to 
expanding access to basic sanitation 
● 
Good technical knowledge of social and behavior change and community mobilization 
● 
Good technical knowledge of sanitation governance, policies, regulations, and monitoring 
and evaluation 
● 
Knowledge and experience with building sanitation markets 
● 
Knowledge and experience with financing options for sanitation 
● 
Extensive experience in designing and implementing monitoring, evaluation, and 
learning (MEL) activities for complex projects of similar size and scope to the County 
Sanitation activity in developing countries 
5. Guiding Principles 
5.1. Sustainability and Self-Reliance: A key USAID priority is the ability of a country, 
working across its sectors (government, civil society, citizens, economy) to eventually solve its 
own development challenges. The County Sanitation activity will aim to increase Liberians’ 
ability (at the national, county, community, and household levels) to eliminate open defecation 
and ensure access to basic sanitation facilities. The activity will apply programmatic tools and 
capacity development approaches to incentivize and strengthen local capacity at all levels to 
enable Liberians to take more responsibility in eliminating open defecation and planning, 
managing and financing basic sanitation services. The activity will ensure the development and 
implementation of sustainability strategies and plans at the county, district and community levels 
to ensure scale up and continuity of models developed under these interventions 
5.2. Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation : USAID’s Program Cycle guidance (ADS 
201.3.7), “Strategic 
collaboration, continuous learning, and adaptive management link together 
all components of the Program Cycle.” This requires integrating Collaboration, Learning and 
Adaptation (CLA) into program designs and implementation to ensure that there is coordination 
with others, grounded in a strong evidence base, and iteratively adapted to remain relevant 
throughout implementation. The applicant needs to demonstrate how collaboration, learning, and 
adaptation will be integrated throughout the Activity design and implementation to help in 
addressing development challenges. 

Page 15 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Establishing implementation decision points/milestones will be necessary during the life of the 
activity. A draft CLA Plan will be submitted with the application. ADS 201.3.4.10.B describes 
potential approaches to CLA that include, but are not limited to: 

● 
Having partners identify knowledge gaps in the theory of change for their activity or in 
their technical knowledge base and supporting them in identifying and implementing 
ways to fill these gaps; 
● 
Planning for and engaging in regular opportunities for partners to reflect on progress, 
such as partner meetings, portfolio reviews, and after-action reviews. These opportunities 
may focus on challenges and successes in implementation to date, changes in the 
operating environment or context that could affect programming, opportunities to better 
collaborate or influence other actors, and/or other relevant topics; 
● 
Encouraging or requiring partners under a project to collaborate, where relevant. 
Collaboration activities may include joint work planning, regular partner meetings that 
facilitate knowledge sharing, and/or working groups organized along geographic or 
technical lines. These activities require time and resources, and appropriate resources 
should be budgeted; 
● 
Involving implementing partners in the USAID learning activities, such as portfolio 
reviews or stocktaking efforts, as appropriate; and 
● 
Using the knowledge and learning gained from implementation, opportunities to reflect 
on performance, monitoring data, evaluations, knowledge about the context, and other 
sources to adjust interventions and approaches as needed. 
5.3. Gender Equality and Social Inclusion: Gender equality and social inclusion (GESI) is an 
integral part of all USAID Liberia activities. There is a high and pervasive disparity in health 
outcomes by factors such as gender, wealth and ethnicity, disability and geographic location in 
Liberia. The activities will need to strongly consider GESI issues when designing the technical 
approach; and to analyze the key exclusion issues in service delivery and how they will be 
minimized and monitored or improved health outcomes will not be achieved. The USAID 
Gender Equality and Female Empowerment Policy can be found at http://www.usaid.gov/whatwe-
do/gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment. Gender integration is a mandatory 
consideration in all USAID programming. Applicants are required to explicitly ask how gender 
issues — 
such as identifying and understanding the causes of gender inequalities; differences in 
roles, responsibilities, and needs of men and women; and the relationships between men and 
women, within the same sex, and between older and younger men and women — 
are linked to 
sanitation outcomes and markets and how gender issues will be integrated into all program 
components. Likewise, applicants must articulate how program activities will ensure equal 
opportunities for historically marginalized populations in Liberia's diverse society. 
5.4. Engagement of Local Actors: Liberia has a rich, diverse and complex social system 
and structure that plays a critical role in influencing key decisions that impact sanitation 
behaviors and interventions. Partnerships with local communities, schools and academic 
institutions, health care organizations, public and private providers, and professional 
societies, as well as faith-based, non-governmental, and civil society organizations, will be 
essential to the success of the activity. 
6. Environmental compliance and climate change: 
Page 16 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

USAID promotes environmentally sound design by requiring that all USAID funded 
activities undergo an environmental impact assessment. This is accomplished through an 
Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), an Environmental Assessment (EA) or a Request 
for a Categorical Exclusion, all in accordance with Title 22 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 216, commonly known as 22 CFR 216 or "Reg 216." 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 

USAID’s activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include 

environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. This mandate is codified in 22 CFR 216 and in USAID’s ADS Parts 
201 and 204, which, in part, requires that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-
financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate 

environmental safeguards are adopted for 
all activities. All recipient’s environmental 

compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are specified in the 
following paragraphs of this NOFO. In addition, the recipient must comply with host 
country environmental regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case 
of conflict between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. No activity 
funded under this NOFO will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented 
in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 

(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation.”) 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the Recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative and Mission 
Environmental Officer and/or Regional Environmental Adviser and Bureau Environment 
Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities under this planned 
award to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation. An environmental review has been completed for this 
Activity. USAID has determined that a categorical exclusion applies to one of the objectives 
with no anticipated impact on the physical environment. However, USAID also determined 
that a Negative Determination with Conditions and mitigation measures applies to the other 
objectives. This indicates that if the activities under these objectives are implemented 
subject to the specified conditions and mitigation measures, they are expected to have no 
significant adverse effect on the environment. The recipient shall be responsible for 
implementing all IEE conditions measures pertaining to this Activity. 

If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, they shall inform the AOR for review and amendment to the 
IEE/RCE documentation No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving 
written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. Any ongoing 
activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and 
written approval is received from USAID. 

Additional information is available here: Environmental Compliance 

Page 17 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Climate Risk Analysis: In recognition of the fact that Climate change is a cross cutting issue 
that can have significant impacts on regional, national, and local development efforts in all 
sectors, in 2014 President Obama signed Executive Order (EO) 13677 which requires 

integration of climate‐resilience considerations into all United States international 

development work to the extent permitted by law. ADS 201 (Planning) also states that all 
missions are required to fully factor climate change into their foreign assistance planning 
and manage the associated climate risks. 

Climate Risk Management (CRM) screening is the process of assessing, addressing and 
adaptively managing climate risks that may impact the ability of USAID funded programs 
to achieve their objectives. The screening outlines specific climate risks that are potential 
negative consequences on projects or activities due to changing climatic conditions to 
activity design and implementation, and opportunities to address the risks identified. 

Liberia is vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability and change, such as warmer 
temperatures, increases in annual rainfall, and increases in the frequency of heavy rainfall 
events. These 
climate change impacts present challenges to the country’s socio-economic 
development. Liberia’s low adaptive capacity to respond to climate change is partially due 


to the detrimental effects of the 1989-2003 Civil War. Since the war, the government, along 
with various international and national institutions and organizations, has been taking 
actions to better understand and address climate change challenges throughout the country. 
Remaining needs include data on short and long-term climate change impacts and 
vulnerabilities within the country, as well as the financial, technological, and human 
resources to identify adaptation priorities and implement appropriate adaptation plans and 
Short-term climate variability is already affecting Liberia, including temperature increases 

and rainfall variability. As the GoL notes in their new national climate policy, “the impacts 

of climate change in Liberia not only undermine development gains but also pose serious 

risk to food security and adaptive capacity,” 
requiring urgent and concerted national action. 

As impacts become more pronounced, climate change may erode the progress that Liberia 
has made and limit gains in the future, including the government’s ability to address its 
development challenges. 

7. Construction Risk Management 
If any construction activities are proposed to achieve the objectives, the activity should ensure 
that appropriate measures are taken to mitigate construction risks. This should include having a 
licensed architect‐engineer (A-E) firm complete engineering designs, completing construction 
under a separate subaward to a qualified construction contractor, ensuring quality‐assurance 


throughout the life of the construction activity, and planning for operations and maintenance. 

USAID will perform and document risk‐screening of each identified and discrete construction 
activity by using the Construction Risk‐Assessment Tool. 


USAID shall complete the risk screening as soon as the need to include construction in the award 
is identified and as early as possible in the design of the activity. The risk screening must be 
completed and filed prior to implementation of construction. Screening must be updated 
throughout the life of the activity when the level of risk changes, when additional mitigation 
actions have been taken, or additional risk is perceived. In accordance with ADS 303.3.30 

Page 18 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Limitation on Construction under Assistance and USAID Implementation of Construction 
Activities ‐ A Mandatory 
Reference for ADS Chapters 303, no construction activities other than 
those explicitly approved under the agreement may be performed as part of the cooperative 
agreement. A description, location(s) and cost of the specific construction activities must be 
included. See Annex 2 for additional information. 

. 

[END OF SECTION A– 
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION] 

Page 19 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

I. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 
USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID 
intends to provide $30,000,000 in total USAID funding over a five (5) year period. USAID 
reserves the right to make multiple awards or no awards at all through this opportunity. 

II. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 
The expected performance indicators are available under section A of the NOFO. 

III. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 
The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date is TBD, on 
or about the date of the signature of the award. 

IV. Substantial Involvement 
USAID may be substantially involved under this agreement in the following areas: 

●TheAgency’s approval of the recipient’s implementation plans during performance; 
●TheAgency’s involvement in the selection of key recipient personnel as will be proposed 
in the application, approved and incorporated in the final award; 

●Approval of Sub Awards: USAID shall have substantial involvement in the criteria and 
selection of sub‐award recipients through means of collaboration and joint participation. 
Unless otherwise directed by the Agreement Officer, USAID shall concur on the 

selection of all sub‐award recipients and substantive provisions of the sub‐awards (see 2 

CFR 200.331 for requirements); 

●TheAgency and recipient collaboration or joint participation, such as when the recipient’s 
successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical 
knowledge; 
●Agency monitoring to permit special kinds of direction or redirection because of inter‐ 
relationships with other USAID and other donor programs, alignment with U.S. foreign 

policy objectives and USAID/Liberia’s strategy; and 

●Approval of Recipient’s construction plan and agency’s ability to immediately halt an 
activity if recipient does not meet construction specifications. 

V. Authorized Geographic Code 
The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 
937, which is the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than 
advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. 

Page 20 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

VI. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 
The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is 
to transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Countywide 
Sanitation Activity, which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 
responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. 
The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner 
consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of 
the Federal award. 

[END OF SECTION B– 
FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION] 

Page 21 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

I. Eligible Applicants 
Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. Eligible organizations include: 

● 
registered U.S. and non-U.S. private non-governmental organizations; 
● 
registered U.S. and non-U.S. non-profit organizations; and 
● 
for-profit organizations willing to forego profit. 
Types of organizations could include foundations, faith-based organizations (FBOs), 
community-based organizations (CBOs), host country organizations, private organizations 
affiliated with public academic institutions and international non-governmental 
organizations, private companies, professional associations, and other international and 
indigenous organizations. Local partnership consortia comprising any of the above are also 
encouraged to apply. 

Other U.S. Government departments and agencies may not apply for USAID funding under 
this NOFO. 

Host country government agencies/entities are not eligible to apply. Furthermore, cost 
applications may not contain Level of Effort related costs for host country government staff. 

All applicants must be legally recognized organizational entities under applicable law. 

II. Responsibility of Applicant: In order for an award to be made under this opportunity, the 
USAID Agreement Officer must make an affirmative determination that the applicant is 
“responsible,” 
as discussed in ADS 303.3.9. This means that the applicant: 


i. Possesses or has the ability to obtain the necessary management competence to plan and 
carry out the assistance program to be funded, and that the applicant will practice mutually 
agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID; 
ii. Has a satisfactory record of performance; 
iii. Does not have active exclusions in the System for Award Management (SAM) 
(beta.sam.gov); iv. Does not appear on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) and 
Blocked Persons List maintained by the U.S. Treasury for the Office of Foreign Assets 
Control, sometimes referred to as the “OFAC List” (online at: 


http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/SDNList/Pages/default.aspx); and 

v. Is not listed in the United Nations Security designation list (online at: 
http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1267/aq_sanctions_list.shtml). 
Failure to meet these thresholds will lead to removal from consideration for an award. 

III. New Partners: USAID encourages applications from new partners. However, resultant 
awards to these organizations may be delayed if USAID must undertake necessary pre-award 
reviews of these organizations to determine their “responsibility” as discussed above. These 
organizations should take this into account and plan their implementation dates and activities 
accordingly. 

Page 22 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

IV. Local Organizations and Sub-Agreements: Local organizations (lead host-country 
investigators or institutions) may enter into sub-agreements with technical-assistance 
providers locally or based in other countries including the United States. For any application, 
sub-agreements to non-local (outside of host-country) entities are limited to less than 50% of 
the entire award, unless a specific justification is provided. 
V. Non-Local Organizations and Sub-Agreements: Other (non-local) lead investigators and 
institutions funded through this announcement are encouraged to partner with local partners. 
VI. Cost Sharing or Matching 
Cost sharing or matching is not a requirement under this NOFO. However, we encourage the 
Applicant to cost share or leverage additional resources from other stakeholders to enhance 
results. 
Cost‐sharing or matching means that portion of project or program costs not borne by the 
U.S. Government. Cost‐sharing includes cash and in‐kind contributions and is subject to 2 
CFR 200.306 and the USAID standard provision for Non‐U.S. NGOs entitled “Cost‐Share‐
June 2012” which, inter alia, requires that cost‐sharing be verifiable from the Recipient’s 
records. Cost‐sharing or 
matching is normally associated with contributions from the same 
prime and sub‐recipient sources that also receive USAID funds under an award but can 
include contributions from third parties. Failure to meet a cost‐sharing requirement can result 
in the Recipient having to make refunds to USAID or a reduction in future funding. 
[END OF SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION] 

Page 23 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

I. Agency Point of Contact 
Rukmal S. Perera 
Agreement Officer 
Office of Acquisition and Assistance 
USAID/Liberia 
rperera@usaid.gov 
Mailing Address: USAID/Liberia 502 Benson Street, Monrovia, Liberia. 
II. Questions and Answers 
Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to rperera@usaid.gov with a 
copy to Edward Lamin at elamin@usaid.gov no later than the date and time indicated on the 
cover letter, as amended. 
III. General Content and Form of Application 
a) Overall Process 
The award process under this NOFO will have four phases. The purpose of this process is to 
identify Applicants with the best technical approaches that will have the greatest chance of 
success in Liberia. Below is the process diagram for the award under this NOFO. 


The four phases are as follows: 

1. CONCEPT PAPER: Applicants will be expected to submit a concept paper outlining 
their approach to achieving the results described in Section A. The Application will be 
reviewed in accordance with the merit review criteria described in Section E and will be 
considered for further review after USAID’s determination of meeting eligibility 

requirements and review criteria. 

2. ORAL PRESENTATIONS: Applicants with the best concept papers will be invited to 
present their applications orally in Monrovia, Liberia (either in person or virtually), and 
will participate in a detailed question and answer session. USAID will provide notice to 
all applicants selected to participate in oral presentations. 
Page 24 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

3. CO-CREATION: This phase will be facilitated by USAID which will consist of a co-
creation process involving the highest-ranked applicant from the second phase, i.e the 
apparently successful applicant (s) and its selected strategic partners. During co-creation, 
USAID expects dedicated discussions on how to refine proposed approaches and 
situational model to ensure successful achievement of Activity objectives. Discussions 
will also include theory of change, and discuss how to develop indicators to support 
monitoring, adaptive management, evaluation and learning. For more information on co-
creation and its design approaches, see https://usaidlearninglab.org/library/co-creationdiscussion-
note-ads-201 
4. FULL APPLICATION: Following a successful co-creation process, the apparently 
successful applicant(s) will be requested to submit full technical and cost applications 
reflecting the co-creation discussions and conclusions. Additional documents may be 
required at this stage. 
USAID’s Agreement Officer will engage in a final review, award negotiation, responsibility 
determination, cost/price evaluation, and other steps as needed prior to award. USAID may 
request additional information from the Applicant(s) concerning its technical approach, 
organizational capacity, management structure and past performance, cost application and 
representations and certifications. USAID may cancel the negotiation(s) and award process at 
no cost to the Government. 

IV. APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 
Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted by email to Rukmal S. Perera, 
Agreement Officer at rperera@usaid.gov with a copy to Edward Lamin at elamin@usaid.gov 
no later than the closing date and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. A late 
application may be considered at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. The Applicant 
must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of 
delivery receipt date and time. Email submissions must include the NOFO number and 

applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple 


emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost 
application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", 
etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email should 
have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, Part 
1 of 2". 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application be submitted as a consolidated email 

attachment, e.g., that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application into a 
single document before sending it. 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check 
their own email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant 
discovers an error in transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject 
line of the email or indicate in the file name that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not 
send the same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please 
note that it is a "corrected" email. 

Page 25 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of 
several hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to 
send the application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial 
point of entry to the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID cannot guarantee their 
acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 25MB. 

V. APPLICATION FORMAT 
Phase 1: CONCEPT PAPER FORMAT AND CONTENT 

The Applicant should ONLY submit the information and materials specified – 
no other 
format will be accepted or reviewed. 

a) Overview 
Applicants will submit concept papers that respond to the objectives/results/sub-results 
outlined in Section A of this NOFO. It should demonstrate the Applicant’s capabilities and 
expertise with respect to achieving the goals of the program. The Applicants should articulate 
a technical approach to achieving the results that reflects state-of-the-art technical 
knowledge, creativity and innovation. 

Applicants are invited to submit a concept paper not to exceed 10 pages, and an annex not to 
exceed 25 pages. 

Concept papers will be evaluated according to the criteria described in Section E. The 
applicants with the highest-rated concept papers will be invited to participate in Phase 2. In 
the event USAID determines none of the submitted applications are acceptable, USAID will 
issue an amendment to the NOFO to seek a second round of interested applicants. 

The format and style of the application shall: 

● 
Be written in English language on letter size (A4) paper and legible; If the concept is in 
any other language, it will be treated as non-responsive and eliminated from further 
consideration. 
● 
Be single spaced, standard margins, Times New Roman font 12-point and with each page 
consecutively numbered; 
● 
Be in searchable and editable Microsoft Word or Adobe Acrobat formats and clearly 
labeled on all pages with the name of the submitting organization, opportunity title; 
● 
Budgets must be submitted in Microsoft Excel in unlocked, unhidden formulas; 
● 
Any graphs, charts, exhibits, tables, etc. contained in the body of the concept paper 
application shall be numbered and included in the stated page limits (see below). Table 
font may be reduced to Times New Roman, 10-point; and 
● 
Not exceed ten (10) pages in length (excluding the cover page table of contents, acronym 
list, and annexes, as described below). 
Page 26 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

b) Concept Paper Content: 
The concept paper should include the following sections: 

1. Cover Page (1 page; not included in the page count) 
The cover page must include the following information: 

● 
NOFO Number 
● 
Name, address and telephone number of the organization (primary or lead) 
● 
Type of organization (e.g. for profit, non-profit, university, network etc.) 
● 
DUNS Number 
● 
Proposed sub-awardees or partners 
● 
Contact Person’s name and signature, title/position, and contact information 
● 
TIN and, if applicable, LOC number. 
2. Table of Contents (1 page; not included in the page count) 
3. List of Acronyms and Definitions (1 page; not included in the page count) 
4. Technical Approach (included in the 10-page limit) 
In this section, the Applicant should present its overall vision for achieving the goals and 
objectives of the Countywide Sanitation activity described in Section A and explain how its 
consortium and any other sub-awardees or partners will achieve that vision. The applicant 
should describe how it proposes to achieve the activity objectives and why its proposed 
technical approach is the most effective and innovative method for success. 

The technical approach should also demonstrate an understanding of the Liberian context, the 
main actors in the sanitation sector, USAID and GOL priorities, and the key questions and 
guiding principles outlined in Section A. Background information is not necessary unless it is 
information that is not already known to USAID Liberia. 

This section should contain the following: 

● 
A brief summary of the problems/issues being addressed, the goals and objectives, and 
the proposed strategies/activities. 
● 
A description of proposed project activities, and expected results. 
● 
A well-thought-out description of the use of any sub-awardees and/or partner 
organizations to achieve program vision, objectives and expected results. 
● 
Strategies for sustainability (how activities will be designed to promote local ownership 
and self-reliance). 
Page 27 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

● 
Strategies and benchmarks to address key guiding principles outlined in Section A. 
A proposed results framework will be included in the annexes. 

5. Collaboration, Learning, and Adaptation (CLA) Plan (included in the 10-page limit) 
Applicants should summarize their plan for collaboration, monitoring, evaluation, learning, 
and adaptation, addressing key points including the following: 

● 
How monitoring results will be integrated with the GOL’s national health information 
system. 

● 
How results at each of the different levels of the system (household, community, district, 
regional, etc) will be measured. 
● 
Brief summary of proposed research and learning topics. 
● 
Illustrative indicators. 
● 
Plan for using the knowledge and learning gained from implementation, opportunities to 
reflect on performance, monitoring data, evaluations, knowledge about the context, and 
other sources to adjust interventions and approaches as needed. 
6. Organizational Capacity, Management, and Staffing Plan (included in the 10-page limit) 
Consortiums: USAID/Liberia does not expect one organization to have all of the professional 
skills, services, and knowledge base required to meet the results; it is for this reason that subawards/
partnerships are encouraged and expected. USAID/Liberia encourages the Applicant 
to clearly describe the individual skills and capacity of each partner organization, define the 
value each partner brings, and how they complement one another. 

Sub-awards/partnerships with local entities will be critical in achieving the results of the 
Activity. Involving a wide array of local partners – 
private, non-profit, faith based, and 
public – 
is a key USAID priority. Whenever possible, the proposed activity should bring new 
development actors into partnership with USAID and or expand USAID’s engagement with 
social entrepreneurs, foundations, the private sector, diaspora communities, etc, to attain the 
objectives and results identified in Section A. Applicants are expected to demonstrate how 
they will successfully engage other partners, such as through building sustained private 
sector or foundation collaborations. 

Management and Staffing Plan: The Applicant should summarize the plan for organizational 
management and staffing plan, taking into account all of the different organizations involved 
in the consortium. The Applicant should succinctly outline an inclusive leadership approach 
that will create a shared common vision and purpose that builds trust and recognizes the 
value and contribution of all sub-awardees/partners. An organizational chart may be included 
in the annex. The Applicant must hire a sufficient number of non-key personnel to meet 

Page 28 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

overall program goals, but within program budget limitation. The Applicant should make use 
of local specialists to the greatest extent possible. Training and building local capacity are 
significant elements of this activity. The staffing plan must include base elements to address 
these concerns. The Applicant should make use of local specialists to the greatest extent 
possible. 

Key Personnel: The Key Personnel are critical for a successful implementation of the 
activities. They are subject to approval by the USAID Agreement Officer (AO). The 
Applicant should propose candidates for each of the five key personnel described in Section 

C. The staffing plan and its annexes (i.e. resumes) should clearly show how the individuals as 
well as the proposed staffing mix are appropriate to achieve the objectives under the RFA 
and support implementation at all levels. Key personnel must have sufficient managerial as 
well as technical capacity, expertise and experience to effectively manage and support the 
overall project and its staff as outlined in the responsibilities below. The Applicant must 
include a letter of commitment for each key personnel in the annex. 
USAID expects the Applicant to nominate the best mix of key personnel to oversee the 
implementation of their activities, regardless of their national origin. Please note that any 
nominations of key personnel with less than 100% LOE will not be accepted. 

Brief resumes for key personnel should be included in the annex, as described below. 

7. Institutional Capability and Past Performance (included in the 10-page limit) 
Each member of the proposed consortium must demonstrate clear capacity and experience to 
accomplish the range of technical and health system interventions described in Section A. In 
this section, the Applicant should briefly summarize its ability to gather the resources and 
expertise necessary to implement its application, and to be able to sustain their efforts for the 
duration of the resulting Cooperative Agreement. Key points include demonstrated 
successful performance in managing and implementing similar programs, in size and scale, 
preferably in West Africa. The Applicant must identify up to five (5) Contracts, Grants or 
Cooperative Agreements involving the most similar or related programs completed during 
the past five years. The Applicant must also identify three most similar or related activities 
completed during the past five years for the Major proposed implementing sub-partners, if 
any, as well. Major sub-partners are defined as sub-awardees whose total estimated budget 
equals 20 percent or more of the Applicant’s total estimated budget. 

Further details on the past performance of each member of the consortium may be included 
in the annex, as described below. 

8. Annexes (not included in the page count) 
Page 29 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

A. Timeline: Proposed timeline, i.e. project duration or time needed to complete the 
proposed activities for the 5-year life of the project (no more than one page). 
B. Proposed Results Framework: If desired, applicants may propose their own results 
framework to achieve the objectives described in Section A (no more than one page). 
C. Organizational Management Chart/Staffing Plan: Including all of the members of the 
consortium (no more than one page). 
D. Key Personnel Resumes: For each proposed key personnel candidate, the applicant 
should explain how their qualifications individually and collectively match the 
requirements listed in Section A. The applicant should also include multiple (maximum 
of five) references per candidate from supervisors, colleagues, employees, and most 
importantly relevant donor organizations (no more than two pages per candidate, 10 
pages total). 
E. Letters of Commitment: From each of the key personnel candidates (no more than one 
page per candidate, ). 
F. Past Performance: Information should be included for each member of the consortium. 
Technical capacity will be evaluated, as well as the ability of each member of the 
consortium to work together towards a common goal. Each member of the consortium is 
strongly encouraged to provide specific examples of significant impact of their past 
activities and how cooperation in prior partnerships/consortia contributed to that impact. 
USAID will consider relevant projects successfully performed during the past five years 
to be “recent performance information” (no more 
than four pages total). 


G. Other Charts, Graphs, Tables, or Data: Other information considered essential to the 
application (no more than two pages). 
H. Proposed Notional Budget: Estimated cost summary, including direct costs, indirect 
costs, and cost share contribution by the Applicant and sub-awardees/partners (no more 
than one page). 
c) PHASE 2: ORAL PRESENTATION FORMAT AND CONTENT 
A. Overview 
Based on USAID’s evaluation of the Concept Papers, selected Applicants will be invited to 

orally present their concepts and technical approaches. This oral presentation is a 
requirement. The delivery method could be either virtually or in person (or a combination of 

Page 30 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

both) and is still to be determined. The presentation will be made to the Selection Committee 
(SC) in the presence of the Agreement Officer. The following participants must be part of the 
presentation team and must attend the presentation: 

● 
Proposed Chief of Party. The proposed COP must lead the presentation in collaboration 
with other key personnel as stated below. 
● 
Proposed CLA Advisor. 
● 
One technical representative from each of the proposed consortium members. 
USAID is not responsible for costs associated with travel or presentation costs. 

Applicants who will be invited to the oral presentations will be notified promptly as to the 
date of their scheduled presentation. At the time of the invitation, USAID will provide initial 
discussion items based on the review of the concept paper. 

B. Format of the Oral Presentation 
An initial 90-minute oral presentation by the Applicant will be followed by a two-hour 
question and answer (Q&A)/discussion period where the Applicant will respond to questions 
related to their presentation as well as to other questions arising from their Concept Paper. 
This will be followed by USAID deliberations and then a second, one-hour Q&A/discussion 
period (all times are approximate). 

A PowerPoint slide deck used during the oral presentations will become an official part of 
the source selection file and may be used for reference purposes during review. The initial 
slide deck must be provided to the Agreement Officer two days prior to the oral presentation 
so as to ensure that a copy is ready in case of technical issues, and to ensure that sufficient 
print-out copies are available. 

The Oral Presentation session is expected to take 5-6 hours for each applicant. The tentative 
oral presentation agenda is as follows: 

●Introductions (10 minutes) [Lead: Agreement Officer] 
●PowerPoint Presentation (90 minutes) [Lead: Applicant] 
●Q’s & A’s/Discussions 
-Round 1 (2 hours) [Lead: SC and Applicant] 
●Break for Applicant/USAID Deliberations -(1 hour) 
●Q&A/Discussions -Round 2/Final (1 hour) [Lead: SC and Applicant] 
●Adjournment/Next Steps (10 minutes) [Lead: Agreement Officer]. 
The audience for the oral presentations will include the Selection Committee (SC), the 
Agreement Officer, and the Acquisition & Assistance Specialist(s). Each oral presentation 

Page 31 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

will be evaluated according to the merit criteria described in Section E. Information outside 
of the merit criteria will not be considered in the final decision of the SC. 

C. Content of the Oral Presentation: 
In addition to responding to the key issues and questions from USAID, the presentation must 
address the following areas: 

1. Technical Approach 
In addition to addressing any questions, weaknesses and clarifications, the Applicant must 
provide further detail on the technical approach outlined in the concept paper, demonstrating 
an understanding of the Liberian health context and the key results and guiding principles 
described in Section A. The presentation should include the following: 

● 
Proposed theory of change. 
● 
Proposed results framework. 
● 
Proposed activities and expected results and outcomes, including how the activities will 
achieve the results/sub-results described in Section A. 
● 
How the proposed approach responds to GOL and USAID priorities. 
● 
How the proposed activities will lead to sustainability and self-reliance. 
● 
How the proposed technical approach will facilitate the collaborative involvement of 
local stakeholders and beneficiaries at all levels, and the identification of local problems 
and local solutions to achieve and sustain the desired health results. 
2. CLA Plan 
The Applicant must provide further detail on the CLA Plan outlined in the concept paper, 
focusing on how adaptive management techniques will be used to inform activity 
management and key decisions. The presentation should include the following: 

● 
How the activity plans to use the knowledge and learning gained from implementation, 
opportunities to reflect on performance, monitoring data, evaluations, knowledge about 
the context, and other sources to adjust interventions and approaches as needed and make 
informed course corrections based on evidence. 
● 
How certain monitoring results will be integrated with the GOL’s national health 
information system. 

● 
How results at each of the different levels of the system (household, community, district, 
regional, etc) will be measured. 
● 
Details of proposed research and learning areas of interest. 
● 
Illustrative indicators. 
Page 32 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

● 
Information on performance indicators, including baseline data collection, analysis, 
dissemination, and illustrative targets for each major indicator. 
3. Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 
The presentation must provide further details on the following: 

● 
The structure of the consortium, the roles of each consortium member, and the 
comparative strengths of each member. 
● 
The proposed mix of positions and management structure. 
● 
The roles and responsibilities of the Home Office and the field-based staff, including 
their assigned management and decision-making authorities. 
● 
How the organizational structure will effectively and efficiently achieve the health 
objectives described in Section A. 
4. Cost Efficiency Plan (Value for Money) 
As budget details depend on the specifics outlined in the final program description, a full cost 
application will be developed by the Applicant once the project description is finalized. 

During the oral presentations, the Applicants should present more details on the notional 
budget from the concept paper and explain why their consortium offers the best value for 
money and cost effectiveness for results achieved. Applicants must describe the thought 
process that has gone into budgeting and what they expect key parts of their intervention 
strategy will cost. Key points include the approach to cost sharing, staff salaries, efficient use 
of resources, efficient use of sub-agreements, use of local solutions, etc. 

5. Co-Creation Strategy 
The Applicant must identify the personnel that will participate in the co-creation phase 
should the Applicant be selected and present its strategy for the co-creation process, 
specifically coordination and communication with USAID Liberia and other invited 

stakeholders, and the role of the Applicant’s organization and any partners. It is expected that 

the COP and other proposed Activity staff will serve as the key participants. Additional 
presentation instructions will be provided to Applicants selected for the oral presentations. 

d) PHASE 3: CO-CREATION 
USAID/Liberia will select an Apparently Successful Applicant (ASA) from the oral 
presentation for development of a full application. The selected ASA will be notified by 
letter and must then participate in a co-creation workshop to be hosted by USAID in 
Monrovia, Liberia. 

Page 33 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

This workshop, attended by the ASA, USAID representatives, key representatives from the 
Liberian Government, stakeholders from the county, district, and community levels, and 
other donors and organizations and USAID implementing partners, will bring together the 
various technical approaches and innovations and further define activities. Further details on 
this process will be provided to the ASA after the selection. 

Following the co-creation workshop, the ASA will be asked to submit full technical and cost 
applications. 

USAID reserves the right to select another applicant from the pool of merit review Phase 2 
participants in case final agreement is not reached with the initially selected ASA. 

e) FULL APPLICATION 
Only the ASA will have to submit a full application after notification by the Agreement 

Officer. Please do not submit the full application without USAID’s notice. The AO will 


provide the ASA with full application submission instructions. 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

Funding Restrictions 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

Construction: Construction is limited to those activities that directly support program 
objectives. 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services 
that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic 
code specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality 
requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 
1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or 
an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in 
Page 34 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

the competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 

personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 

obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after 
submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO 
no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 
b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 
The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing 
for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include 

but are not limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained 

access to non-public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an 

applicant or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal 

assistance funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon 
receiving any such notification from the applicant. 

Electronic Payment System 

1. Definitions: 
a. “Cash Payment System” means a payment system that generates any transfer offunds 
through a transaction originated by cash, check, or similar paper instrument. This includes 
electronic payments to a financial institution or clearing house that subsequently issues 
cash, check, or similar paper instrument to the designated payee. 

b. “Electronic Payment System” means a payment system that generates any transfer of 
funds, other than a transaction originated by cash, check, or similar paper instrument, that 
is initiated through an electronic terminal, telephone, mobile phone, computer, or magnetic 
tape, for the purpose of ordering, instructing or authorizing a financial institution to debit or 
credit an account. The term includes debit cards, wire transfers, transfers made at automatic 
teller machines, and point-of-sale terminals. 

2. The recipient agrees to use an electronic payment system for any payments under this 
award to beneficiaries, subrecipients, or contractors. 
3. Exceptions. Recipients are allowed the following exceptions, provided the recipient 
documents its files with the appropriate justification: 
a. Cash payments made while establishing electronic payment systems, provided that this 
exception is not used for more than six months from the effective date of this award. 
b. Cash payments made to payees where the recipient does not expect to make payments to 
the same payee on a regular, recurring basis, and payment through an electronic payment 
system is not reasonably available. 
c. Cash payments to vendors below $3000, when payment through an electronic payment 
system is not reasonably available. 
d. The Recipient has received a written exception from the Agreement Officer that a 
specific payment or all cash payments are authorized based on the Recipient’s written 

Page 35 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

justification, which provides a basis and cost analysis for the requested exception. 

4. More information about how to establish, implement, and manage electronic payment 
methods is available to recipients at http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/programs/c2etoolkit. 
[END OF SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION] 

Page 36 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

I. CRITERIA 
The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters 
which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against 
which the concept notes and the application will be evaluated. 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored 
by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

The below chart details the rating scheme that will be used by the Committee during the 
review process: 

Adjective Rating Description 
Exceptional An Exceptional application has the following characteristics: 
● 
A comprehensive and thorough application of exceptional merit. 
● 
Application meets and fully exceeds the Government expectations or 
exceeds NOFO objectives and presents very low risk or no overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful performance. 
● 
Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that may exist. 
Very Good A Very Good application has the following characteristics: 
● 
An application demonstrating a strong grasp of the objectives. 
● 
Application meets NOFO objectives and presents a low overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
● 
Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that exist. 
Satisfactory A Satisfactory application has the following characteristics: 
● 
An application demonstrating a reasonably sound response and a 
good grasp of the objectives. 
● 
Application meets NOFO objectives and presents a moderate overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
● 
Strengths outweigh weaknesses. 
Marginal A Marginal application has the following characteristics: 
● 
The application shows a limited understanding of the objectives. 
● 
Application meets some or most of the NOFO objectives, but 
presents a significant overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 
● 
Weaknesses equal or outweigh any strength that exists. 
Unsatisfactory An Unsatisfactory application has the following characteristics: 
● 
The Application does not meet the NOFO objectives or requires a 
major rewrite of the application. 

Page 37 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

● 
Presents an unacceptable degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 
● 
Weaknesses demonstrate a lack of understanding of the 
Government’s needs. 
● 
Weaknesses significantly outweigh any strength that exists. 

II. REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 
The concept and full application (if successful) will be reviewed by USAID personnel 
against the eligibility criteria under section C and the merit review criteria under part III. The 
decision to issue an award vests with the Agreement Officer. 

a. Phase 1: CONCEPT PAPER MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 
Review criteria for the Concept Paper include the following, in order of descending 

importance: 

1. Technical Approach 
2. CLA Plan 
3. Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 
4. Institutional Capability 
Technical Approach 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which they demonstrate a strong, evidence-based, 
and locally focused approach to achieving the results described in Section A. Considerations 
include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the technical approach demonstrates an understanding of the context 
and situation of sanitation in Liberia and will lead to the accomplishment of the intended 
goals and objectives, through high impact and sustainable activities. 
● 
The applicant’s approach to identify local organizations and networks, build their 
capacity and transition them to self-stewardship and sustainability within the activity 

performance period. 

CLA Plan 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which their proposed CLA plan will facilitate 
adaptive management to achieve optimal results in sanitation. Specifically the quality of the plan 
in collecting and using data to accurately measure program effectiveness and make informed 
course corrections as needed based on evidence. 

Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 

Page 38 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the organizational management plan will 
contribute to the expected results, the strength of any proposed consortium and consortium 
members, and the quality of the staffing plan, including the qualifications of the key personnel 
candidates. 

Institutional Capability 

Each member of the proposed consortium must demonstrate clear capacity and experience to 

accomplish the range of technical and health system interventions described in Section A. 

b. Phase 2: ORAL PRESENTATION MERIT REVIEW 
For those applicants selected for the oral presentation stage, the criteria below serve as the 
standard against which all oral presentations will be evaluated. Under every criterion, quality of 
the Applicant’s responses to questions and concerns raised by USAID will also be evaluated. 
The rating scheme will be the same as the one listed above for Phase 1. 

Technical Approach 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which they demonstrate a strong, evidence-based, 
and locally focused technical approach for achieving the results described in Section A. 
Considerations include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the technical approach demonstrates an understanding of the context 
and situation of sanitation in Liberia and will lead to the accomplishment of the intended 
goals and objectives described, through high impact and sustainable activities. 
2. CLA Plan 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which their proposed CLA plan will facilitate 
adaptive management to achieve optimal results in sanitation. Considerations include the 
following: 

● 
The quality of the plan in collecting and using data to accurately measure program 
effectiveness and make informed course corrections as needed based on evidence. 
3. Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the organizational management plan will 
contribute to the expected results, the strength of any proposed consortium and consortium 
members, and the quality of the staffing plan, including the qualifications of the key personnel 
candidates. Considerations include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the proposed organizational chart will facilitate the achievement of 
expected results. 
● 
The quality of the work of the proposed key personnel present for the oral presentations 
during the presentation and Q&A sessions. 
Page 39 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

4. Proposed Cost Efficiency Plan (Value for Money) 
Applicants will be evaluated on whether their consortium offers the best value for money and 
the cost effectiveness for results achieved. Considerations will include the following: 

● 
Overall cost efficiency and the extent to which the budget focuses resources on activities 
that directly benefit beneficiaries. 
5. Co-Creation Strategy 
Applicants will be evaluated on the overall quality of their co-creation strategy. Considerations 
will include the following: 

● 
The Applicant’s planned coordination with USAID, the GOL at the national and county 
levels, community members, and other stakeholders in the sanitation sector. 

III. MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 
a) Phase 1: CONCEPT PAPER MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 
Review criteria for the Concept Paper include the following, in order of descending 

importance: 

1. Technical Approach 
2. CLA Plan 
3. Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 
4. Institutional Capability and Past Performance 
1. Technical Approach 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which they demonstrate a strong, evidence-based, 
and locally focused approach to achieving the results described in Section A. Considerations 
include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the technical approach demonstrates an understanding of the 
Liberian context, responds to GOL and USAID priorities and will lead to the 
accomplishment of the intended goals and objectives described in Section A. 
● 
The extent to which specific proposed activities are high-impact and will result in the 
achievement of the expected results. 
● 
The quality of the plan for sustainability (how activities will be designed to promote local 
ownership and self-reliance). 
● 
The applicant’s approach to identify local organizations and networks, build their 
capacity and transition them to self-stewardship and sustainability within the activity 
performance period. 
Page 40 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

2. CLA Plan 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which their proposed CLA plan will facilitate 
adaptive management to achieve optimal results in sanitation. Considerations include the 
following: 

● 
The quality of the plan in collecting and using data to accurately measure program 
effectiveness and make informed course corrections as needed based on evidence. 
● 
The extent to which certain monitoring results will be integrated with the GOL’s national 
health information system or other existing GOL information systems. 

● 
The quality of the illustrative indicators and the proposed research and learning areas of 
interest. 
3. Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the organizational management plan will 
contribute to the expected results, the strength of any proposed consortium and consortium 
members, and the quality of the staffing plan, including the qualifications of the key personnel 
candidates. 

4. Institutional Capability and Past Performance 
The organization or all members of the proposed consortium will be evaluated on the extent to 
which they convincingly demonstrate through relevant technical and field experience and 
quality of performance in programs of similar technical content and scope. Each member of the 
proposed consortium must demonstrate clear capacity and experience to accomplish the range 
of technical and health system interventions described in Section A. Key points include 
demonstrated successful performance in managing and implementing similar programs in size 
and scale, preferably in West Africa or similar settings. 

b) Phase 2: ORAL PRESENTATION MERIT REVIEW 
For those applicants selected for the oral presentation stage, the criteria below serve as the 
standard against which all oral presentations will be evaluated. The rating scheme will be the 
same as the one listed above for Phase 1. 

1. Technical Approach 
2. MEL Plan 
3. Consortium, Organizational Management, and Staffing Plan 
4. Cost Efficiency Plan (Value for Money) 
5. Co-Creation Strategy 
1. Technical Approach 
Page 41 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which they demonstrate a strong, evidence-based, 
and locally-focused approach to achieving the results described in Section A. Considerations 
include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the technical approach is innovative and will lead to the 
accomplishment of the intended goals and objectives described in Section A, and the 
extent to which it responds to GOL and USAID priorities. 
● 
The extent to which specific proposed activities are high-impact and will result in the 
achievement of the expected results. 
● 
The quality of the plan for sustainability (how activities will be designed to promote local 
ownership and self-reliance). 
● 
The quality of the Applicant’s responses to questions and concerns raised by USAID. 
2. CLA Plan 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which their proposed MEL plan will facilitate 
adaptive management to achieve optimal results in sanitation. Considerations include the 
following: 

● 
The quality of the plan in collecting and using data to accurately measure program 
effectiveness and make informed course corrections as needed based on evidence. 
● 
The extent to which certain monitoring results will be integrated with the GOL’s national 
health information system or other existing GOL information systems. 

● 
The quality of the illustrative indicators and the proposed research and learning areas of 
interest. 
● 
The quality of the Applicant’s responses to questions and concerns raised by USAID. 
3. Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the organizational management plan will 
contribute to the expected results, the strength of any proposed consortium and consortium 
members, and the quality of the staffing plan, including the qualifications of the key personnel 
candidates. Considerations include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the proposed organizational chart will facilitate the achievement of 
expected results. 
● 
The qualifications of the proposed key personnel and the ability of the proposed key 
personnel to carry out the roles and responsibilities specified in Section C. 
● 
The quality of the work of the proposed key personnel present for the oral presentations 
during the presentation and Q&A sessions. 
● 
The quality of the Applicant’s responses to questions and concerns raised by USAID. 
Page 42 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

4. Proposed Cost Efficiency Plan (Value for Money) 
Applicants will be evaluated on whether their consortium offers the best value for money and the 
cost effectiveness for results achieved. Considerations will include the following: 

● 
The extent to which the budget focuses resources on activities that directly benefit 
beneficiaries. 
● 
The extent to which the Applicant understands the costs of doing business in Liberia. 
● 
The overall cost efficiency of the proposed approach. 
● 
The quality of the Applicant’s responses to questions and concerns raised by USAID. 
5. Co-Creation Strategy 
Applicants will be evaluated on the overall quality of their co-creation strategy. Considerations 
will include the following: 

● 
The Applicant’s planned coordination with USAID, the GOL at the national and county 
levels, community members, and other stakeholders in the sanitation sector. 
● 
The quality of the Applicant’s responses to questions and concerns raised by USAID. 
c) Phase-3: CO-CREATION 

The Apparently Successful Applicant identified after Phase 2 will be invited to participate in 
the co-creation process as described in Section D. Further information about the criteria for this 
process will be shared with the Applicants invited to participate. 

[END OF SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION] 

Page 43 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

I. Federal Award Notices 
Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

II. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 
The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 

policies and regulations. 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

For Non-US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

See Annex 1 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

III. Reporting Requirements 
The following programmatic reporting requirements may be made part of any award issued 

under this NOFO: 

a. Annual Work Plans 
The Recipient will develop an annual work plan within 60 days of the effective date of the 

award. The plan will be reviewed and approved by the Agreement Officer’s Representative 

(AOR) within thirty (30) days after receipt of the draft work plan. 60 days before the end of 
each USAID fiscal year, the Recipient will submit to the AOR an annual work plan for the 
following fiscal year. The work plans will include proposed activities for the given year, time 
frame for implementation of annual activities, detailed budget, review of previous year’s 
accomplishments (if applicable), problems, and progress towards achieving award results and 
proposed annual accomplishments and progress towards achieving results. 

b. Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (AMEL) Plan 
Within 90 days of award the Recipient will submit an Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning (AMEL) Plan for the life of the activity that derives from the activities outlined in the 
program description. The AMEL will outline key program activities, indicators of achievement, 
and associated annual and life-of-project targets. This plan will be reviewed and approved by 
the AOR. 

Page 44 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

c. Bi-Annual Performance Reports 
The Recipient will submit bi-annual reports that give insight into the progress of planned 

activities. The narrative report will include qualitative and quantitative information describing 

activities carried out and specific results achieved during the period. In addition, the narrative 

report will indicate key implementation challenges encountered and how they were or are 

planned to be resolved. To the extent that the PMP includes quarterly targets, this should be 

reflected in the narrative report. Reporting schedule will be agreed upon with the USAID AOR. 

The report should also include budgeted versus actual expenditures (along with a brief analysis 

of any variance) and estimated accruals for the period. 

d. Quarterly Financial Reporting 
The Recipient will submit electronic copies of Financial Reports (quarterly SF 425 and final SF 

425) in keeping with 22 CFR 200. The SF 425 must be submitted via electronic format to the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.dpm.psc.gov). In addition, copies 
of all final financial reports shall be submitted to M/FM and the AOR.. The following reporting 
period end dates shall be used for quarterly reports: 3/31, 6/30, 9/30, or 12/31. 
e. Annual Reports 
Within 60 days after the close of each USAID fiscal year, the Recipient will submit to the AOR 

a comprehensive annual report that reflects the progress of program activities over the last year. 

(This report would complement, not replace, the relevant quarterly reports.) The report, based 

on the approved PMP but not necessarily limited to such, should indicate the results and impact 

the program is having on the target beneficiaries. 

f. Construction Plan 
For any construction planned under this activity, the Recipient will submit to the AO a 
Construction Plan before undertaking any form of construction. This Plan must include: 

● 
List of locations for construction activities 
● 
Cost per construction site (The estimated cost of construction activities at a single project 
site must be less than $500,000 in accordance with ADS 303) 
● 
Type of construction to be undertaken 
● 
Implementation plan of construction activities 
● 
Construction materials and quality standards 
● 
Plans for how construction will be monitored and overseen 
● 
Plans for handover to Liberian institutions 
This Plan must be submitted within 180 days of the award. No construction activities may begin 
until the Plan is approved by USAID. 

After approval of the construction plan, Recipient shall procure a properly licensed and 

registered A‐E firm (not an individual) with legal standing in Liberia to provide professional A‐E 
services. To avoid conflicts‐ of‐interest, the A‐E subcontractor or any of its affiliates shall be 
excluded from bidding on construction subcontracts resulting from their design work. USAID 
shall approve procurement and staffing plan while considering universal accessibility. Recipient 

Page 45 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

shall procure construction subcontracts competitively and utilize Firm Fixed Price subcontracts 
and use reimbursement payment method. The construction contractor must be licensed/registered 
in Liberia. 2 CFR 200.320 (c) establishes the sealed bid method as the preferred method for 
Cooperative Agreement recipients to procure construction. 

g. Closeout Plan 
Three to Six months prior to the completion date of the agreement, the Recipient will submit a 

demobilization plan for Agreement Officer approval. The demobilization plan shall include a) 

draft property disposition plan, b) plan for the phase-out of in-country operations, c) delivery 

schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the agreement, and d) timetable for 

completing all required actions in the demobilization plan, including the submission date of the 

final property disposition plan to the Agreement Officer. 

h. Branding and Marking Plan 
The Recipient shall include a branding and marking plan to be evaluated and approved by the 

Agreement Officer with concurrence from the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), due 


no later than 30 days after the award is made, in full compliance with ADS 320. Please refer to 

ADS 320, (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/) specifically ADS 320.3.3.3 for more 

information. Additionally, marking shall comply with the USAID “Graphic Standards Manual” 

available at: www.usaid.gov/branding, or any successor branding policy. A Branding and 

Marking Plan will be requested from the apparently successful applicant only. 

i. Final Report 
The final performance report is a detailed report which summarizes the accomplishments and 

impact in relation to the expected results, in accordance with the approved PMP. It should 

contain a three-page executive summary, an index of all reports and information products 

produced under the agreement, and should discuss the elements in 2 CFR 200.329. 

The report shall be submitted no later than 90 days after the end-date of the agreement to the 

Agreement Officer, and the AOR. In addition, an electronic copy must be submitted either: 

a) Online: http://dec.usaid.gov 
b) By mail (for pouch delivery): 
DEXS Document Submissions 

M/CIO/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

For questions on DEC submissions, contact: M/CIO/KM/DEC 

Telephone: +1 202-712-0579 E-mail: DocSubmit@usaid.gov 

If timelines for submissions are not identified above, they will be determined by the AOR. 

More detail on each reporting deliverable will be included in the eventual award. The 

recipient will also consult with the AOR on the format and expected content of all reports 

Page 46 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

prior to submission. 

IV.Program Income 

Any program incomegenerated under the award will be 
treated in accordance 
with “Program 
Income (December 2014)” from USAID’s Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. NGOs. 

V.SALARY SUPPLEMENTS FOR HOST GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES 

Any payments by the Recipient to employees at any level of any foreign government shall 
be subject to the USAID policy on salary supplements (dated April 1988 or as amended). If 
this issue arises during the period of the Agreement, the Recipient shall consult with USAID 
on any questions regarding the applicability of the policy. 

[END OF SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION] 

Page 47 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

I. NOFO Points of Contact 
Rukmal S. Perera 
Agreement Officer 
Office of Acquisition and Assistance 
USAID/Liberia 

rperera@usaid.gov 

Edward Lamin 
Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 
Office of Acquisition and Assistance 
USAID/Liberia 

elamin@usaid.gov 

Any other POCs will be appointed through official amendments to this NOFO. 

II. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 
The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in 
USAID’s acquisition and assistance process. The 
A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

[END OF SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S)] 

Page 48 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – 
in 
whole or in part – 
for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an 
award is made as a result of – 
or in connection with – 
the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 

data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 


Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 


[END OF SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION] 

Page 49 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

ANNEX 1 -STANDARD PROVISIONS 

The resulting award(s) will include the latest Mandatory and required Standard Provisions for 
either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations in full text. The full text of these 
provisions may be found at: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will also contain the 

following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 


REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

RQD N/A Standard Provision 
TBD RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES -PREDETERMINED 
(NOV 2020) 
RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES -PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOV 2020) 
RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE -PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DEC 2014) 
RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – 
DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 
X RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 
X RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 
X RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 
X RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 
X RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING 
COUNTRY TITLE) (NOV 1985) 
X RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEB 2012) 
X RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS 
(JUNE 1999) 
X RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 
X RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 
X RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUN 2012) 
X RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEB 2012) 
X RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 
X RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEP 2014) 
X RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY -ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 
X RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 
X RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

Page 50 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

X RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS 
TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION 
OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOV 2020) 
X RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOV 2020) 
X RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 
X RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUG 2013) 
X RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 
X RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 
RAA29. RESERVED 
X RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 
X RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOV 2020) 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

Requi 
red 
Not 
Re 
q 
Standard Provision 
TBD RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 
RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 
TBD RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – 
NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOV. 2020) 
RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – 
CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) 
(JUNE 2012) 
RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – 
DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 
X RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 
X RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 
X RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 
X RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 
X RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 
X RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

Page 51 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

X RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN USAID 
ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 
X RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS 
(JUNE 2012) 
X RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 
X RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JAN 2009) 
X RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 
X RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 
X RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 
X RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES (JULY 
2014) 
X RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DEC 2014) 
RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 
RAA30. RESERVED 
X RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 

[END OF ANNEX 1: STANDARD PROVISIONS] 

ANNEX 2 ‐ Construction Resources 

a. USAID Implementation of Construction Activities ‐ A Mandatory Reference 
for ADS 
Chapters 303: 

http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maw 

b. Management of Construction Risk ‐ A Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 201: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/201maw.pdf 

c. Construction Risk Assessment Tool is provided here and is also attached as a separate 
document: 
Annex 5 - Preview of 
Construction Risk Assessment Tool FEB2020.pdf
Page 52 of 53 


Notice of Funding Opportunity No. 72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 
72066922RFA00001 
Countywide Sanitation Activity 

ANNEX 3 ‐ Liberia Country Development Cooperation Strategy: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/CDCS_Liberia_June_2024.pdf 

ANNEX 4 -Sanitation Market Assessment 

Page 53 of 53 


