 

 


 

Notice of Funding Opportunity Type: 

Request for Applications (RFA) 

RFA Title: 

Growth Poles Activity 

RFA Number: 

72061222RFA00006 

Issuance Date: 

September 15, 2022 

Deadline for Submission of Questions: 

October 05, 2022, at 5PM Malawi local time 

Closing Date: 

November 14, 2022, at 5PM Malawi Local time 

Applicant Eligibility: 

Unrestricted 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
(CFDA) Number: 

98.001 - USAID Foreign Assistance for Programs 
Overseas. 



 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications from 
qualified entities to implement the Investing in Diversified Agriculture-led Growth Poles for 
Inclusive, Sustainable and Resilient Wealth Creation (Growth Poles) Activity. There are no 
eligibility restrictions for this notice of funding opportunity. Any U.S. or Regional/International/ 
Local organizations submitting applications may be considered by USAID. 

 

USAID intends to make one award to the applicant whose application meets the objectives of this 
funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this RFA, subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in applying are encouraged to read this RFA thoroughly to 
understand the type of activities sought, application submission requirements and selection 
process. 

 

To be eligible for an award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this RFA 
and meet the eligibility standards in Section C of this RFA. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this RFA and to ensure that the 
RFA has been downloaded from the internet in its entirety. USAID bears no responsibility for 
data errors resulting from transmission or the conversion processes. If you have difficulty 
registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the RFA, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 
1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D. The registration process may take a few weeks to complete. As such, applicants are 
encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

to all potential applicants through www.grants.gov, and ifan amendment to thisRFAwill benecessary, the amendment willalsobe posted to www.grants.gov.

All questions concerning thisRFA must be submitted to the Office of Acquisition and Assistance, 
USAID/Malawi, Lilongwe at e-mail: OAA-Malawi-Solicit@usaid.gov with a copy to 
lchimangeni@usaid.govandgsuya@usaid.govnot later than the date and time stated above.

Applicants must submit all required information (Technicaland Cost Application) as required in 
thisRFA to Dion Glisan, Agreement Officer atOAA-Malawi-Solicit@usaid.gov with a copy to 
lchimangeni@usaid.govandgsuya@usaid.govnot later than the date and time stated above.

Issuance of thisRFA does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government, 
nor does it commit the Government to pay forany costs incurred in preparation or submission ofcomments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at therisk of the applicant. 
All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense.

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs.

Sincerely,

/S/

Dion GlisanAgreement Officer

Attachments: 

Section A– Program DescriptionSection B– Federal Award InformationSection C– Eligibility InformationSection D– Application and Submission Information 
Section E– Application ReviewInformation 
Section F– Federal Award Administration InformationSection G– Federal Awarding Agency ContactsSection H– Other InformationAnnex 1 – Summary Budget TemplateAnnex 2 – Standard ProvisionsAnnex 3 – Performance ReviewTemplate forAssistance AwardsAnnex 4 – USAID/Malawi Local Compensation Plan (LCP) Guide-Effective November 07, 2021Annex 5 – Framework of ObjectivesAnnex 6 – MalawiRapidFeedbackMonitoring System (RFMS)
Annex 7 – Illustrative IndicatorsAnnex 8 – USAID’s TechnicalGuidance on GeospatialMetadata StandardsAnnex 9 – Brief onCompleted AGDIV StudiesAnnex 10 – Summary List of AGDIV ResearchAnnex 11 -List of USAIDInnovation Labs


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

USAID/Malawi intends to address Malawi’s environmental degradation, economic growth, food 
security, resilience, and poverty challenges that have persisted for generations. Thus, the goal of 
this activity is to advance a more inclusive, diversified, and resilient private sector that 
drives sustainable wealth creation1. More specifically, USAID/Malawi has five main strategic 
objectives for this activity: 1) Develop and/or strengthen growth poles that leverage and expand 
private sector investments; 2) Strengthen systems resilience through improved climate and natural 
resource management; 3) Expand inclusive development so that smallholders, youth and women 
increase incomes, assets, and jobs, strengthening household and community resilience; 4) 
Mobilize innovative, impact-oriented credit and finance, and 5) Play a networking, facilitating, 
coordination and adaptive role based on evidence and data within Malawi. This is a five-year, up 
to $40 million activity that will work nationally in geographies and/or value chain poles centered 
around approximately 15-20 growth poles. This activity will contribute to the USAID/Malawi 
Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) (2020-2025) and the US Malawi Embassy 
Integrated Country Strategy (ICS) and will work together with Millennium Challenge Corporation 
(MCC) Compact II. 

1 Matching the goal of the CDCS Development Objective 3. 

2 USAID defines resilience to recurrent crisis as “the ability of people, households, communities, countries, and 
systems to mitigate, adapt to, and recover from shocks and stresses in a manner that reduces chronic vulnerability 
and facilitates inclusive growth.” 

3 GFSS 

In addition, Investing in Diversified Agriculture-led Growth Poles for Inclusive, Sustainable and 
Resilient Wealth Creation (Growth Poles Activity) is designed as an integrated flagship activity to 
achieve CDCS Development Objective Three (DO-3), through the Agency’s Feed the Future 
(FtF) initiative, the Agency’s Climate Change strategy, and Agency’s Resilience approach2 – 
Malawi is designated as an FtF Aligned Country, a Resilience Focus country, and a Nutrition 
Focus Country, all with cross-sectoral, integrated approaches. The strategic direction for the 
activity, like USAID/Malawi’s CDCS, reflects the USG Global Food Security Initiative 2022-
2026 (GFSS)3 – an integrated whole-of-government approach that aims to end global hunger, 
poverty, and malnutrition by following both USAID’s Private Sector Engagement (PSE) Policy 
and the USG’s new Climate Change Strategy. 

The Growth Poles Activity aligns well with the Agency’s PSE initiative where PSE provides a 
pathway for Malawians to accelerate their ability to achieve their own development objectives. 
Through PSE—and the market-based approaches it leverages—USAID and our partners will 


support Malawi build the requisite skills, resources, knowledge, local institutions, and incentives 
that enable local systems and markets to become self-sustaining. With a vested interest in 
sustaining outcomes over the long term, a strong local private sector is an important pillar of any 
country’s self-reliance. Thus, this activity is specifically designed to engage the private sector to 
address challenges, alongside host-country governments and civil society, to collectively 
accelerate the country’s ability to sustain progress with USAID’s support. 

This activity will help Malawi achieve its Vision 2063 -- a quest to revitalize the economy 
through a vision for an Inclusively Wealthy and Self-reliant Nation following the National 
Transformation Agenda, which has an associated first 10-year Implementation Plan. In addition, 
the strategic principles of the Growth Poles follow the Malawi Development and Growth 
Strategy, National Export Strategy, the National Agricultural Investment Plan, the National 
Climate Change Management Strategy, the National Land Resources Management Policy and 
Strategy and the National Resilience Strategy (NRS)4. This activity is closely aligned with the 
NRS “push – pull” concept and approach – in that this activity’s focus on resilience is designed to 
help pull households into opportunities of employment, greater income and empowerment as 
means of improving their livelihoods, working in a collaborative approach with other donors and 
partner programs focused on pushing households out of poverty and food insecurity, to strengthen 
the graduation pathway out of poverty. The same “push – pull” concept applies to pushing the 
private sector into conducting better business practices as well as pulling companies into having 
better business opportunities by way of the growth pole approach to development. Malawi has 
robust and wide-ranging strategic documents that outline the importance of commercialization, 
rural transformation, diversification of the rural economy, a focus on women and youth, and even 
robust guidelines for land resources management, forest restoration, climate mitigation and 
adaptation, and integrated catchment management. However, the government of Malawi (GOM) 
and donors alike have fallen short in achieving ambitious goals and urgently need new models to 
achieve the objectives. 

4 Malawi’s National Resilience Strategy (NRS), Phase I: 2017 – 2022 / Phase II: 2022– 2027 / Phase III: 2027-2030 

2 ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION 

2.1 BACKGROUND AND PROBLEM ANALYSIS 

Challenges are Significant 

Malawi’s economic and environmental development challenges are interwoven and inseparable 
and require multi-sector, integrated solutions designed to mobilize Malawi’s private sector to lift 
people out of poverty and accelerate Malawi’s ability to achieve inclusive, resilient, and 
sustainable wealth generation. Malawi has also not fully addressed some of the indicators needed 
to strengthen the economic enabling environment to outpace the country’s population growth, 
poverty, and environmental degradation. New generations are facing increasing risks, with 75 
percent of the population under 35 and the population set to double in just over two decades. 
Malawi also has one of the highest disparities between men and women, so economic 


opportunities for women, and youth are critical. While Malawi’s economy depends largely on 
agriculture, productivity is constrained by declining farm sizes and degrading soils and 
watersheds and exacerbated by the growing population. Wood and charcoal continue to be the 
mainstay of Malawi’s fuel, with few households accessing power, and 90 percent rely on woody 
biomass for household cooking and heating, which, when combined with population numbers, is 
rapidly driving rampant deforestation. Deforestation brings watershed degradation through the 
loss of ecosystem services, topsoil and soil fertility, and results in siltation of riverine systems and 
damage to critical infrastructure such roads and hydroelectric and water supply dams. These 
negative impacts are exacerbated by climate change flood cycles, ultimately creating a downward 
spiral of declining productivity, food security and livelihoods, reducing Malawi’s ability to 
mitigate for, and adapt to increasing shocks and stresses. 

Access to electricity remains stubbornly low at only 11.4 percent of the population, further 
hampering private sector growth, in particular Malawi’s industrialization agenda. The average 
gross national income (GNI) of a Malawian is the third lowest in the world, just US$380 as of 
20195, and 51 percent of the population still live below the poverty line. While Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) is expected to grow 2.1 percent in 2022, annual percent real GDP per capita 
growth (annual percent, real) is negative, at -0.6 percent, while inflation has gone the highest it 
has been since 2017 and the GOM is facing foreign exchange shortages, in part due to a decline in 
exports from $1.7 billion in 2011 to $937M in 2020, a 40% reduction in its main export of 
tobacco, and fewer, less diversified overall exports. 

5 IMF Malawi Country Private Sector Diagnostic (CPSD) 

Agriculture remains the foundation of Malawi’s economy, providing livelihoods to more than 4.5 
million smallholder farming families, and accounting for 80-90 percent of the country’s foreign 
currency earnings, but the sector’s contribution to gross domestic product continues to decline. 
Roughly 80 percent of Malawians work in the agriculture sector, mostly in rain-fed subsistence 
farming on declining farm sizes. Only one percent of arable land is irrigated, and mechanization 
almost non-existent. Soil health is considered to be at a ‘tipping point’ as described by one of the 
two largest agricultural exporters, based on hundreds of soil samples from farm plots. More than 
80 percent of farmers have severely low soil pH and soil organic matter that hampers the uptake 
of nutrients and requires more comprehensive and integrated soil recovery management. 

Farmers continue to operate largely as independent smallholders rather than in organized groups. 
Irrigation, digitalization, financing, technology use and mechanism are almost non-existent, and 
the economy is undiversified, largely dependent on tobacco and maize, and vulnerable to external 
shocks. A more prosperous future for all Malawians will require a more sustainable, resilient agri-
food system. Today, due to severe environmental degradation combined with climate change, 
most farming households are extremely vulnerable to climatic shocks. The Notre Dame Global 
Adaptation Initiative ranks Malawi 165th out of 181 countries in terms of both vulnerability to the 
impacts of climate change and overall readiness to adapt to it. Bouts of severe drought and 
flooding are increasingly frequent, often leading to significant economic losses. These losses are 


likely to worsen unless urgent action is taken to strengthen environmental, economic, social, and 
climate resilience. 

Malawi experiences multivariate shocks, including seasonal food and nutrition security shocks, 
health, economic shocks, and severe climate-related shocks which have increased in frequency 
and severity over the past two decades, exacerbated by environmental degradation. These shocks 
combined with sluggish agricultural productivity, and inadequate off- and non-farm investments 
have prevented poor Malawians from accumulating and protecting productive and human assets 
that would build resilience in a sustainable way. The most severe shocks are droughts and floods. 
However, Malawi also routinely suffers from pests and livestock diseases, as well as cholera 
outbreaks caused by floods and poor water and sanitation conditions. The figure below shows the 
combined risk of drought and flood in 2014.6 It should be noted that central and southern Malawi 
have the most severe environmental degradation 
in the country and southern Malawi is most 
impacted by climate change, according to models. 

Map
Description automatically generated
6 Government of Malawi, National Resilience Strategy 2018-2030, sourced from World Food Program Context Data Analysis, 2018. 

7 Government of Malawi, National Resilience Strategy, sourced from World Food Program. 

8 Malawi Economic Monitor, Strengthening Human Capital through Nutrition, The World Bank, December 2019. 

The number of food insecure households in 
Malawi has drastically increased since 2000.7 In 
2015-16, over 40 percent of the country was in 
need of humanitarian assistance due to the severe 
droughts and floods, which were the worst in 50 
years. This was followed by Cyclone Idai, which 
destroyed the crops of 300,000 households in 
2019. The impact of cyclical flooding and the 
Fall Army Worm (FAW) infestations also 
continues to increase risk. 8 The health and 
economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic 
have also taken a toll in Malawi, and resulted in 
more people falling into poverty, including an 
additional 500,000 people in urban areas due to 
bottlenecks in food systems and economic 
slowdowns in Malawi and in neighboring 
countries 

Climate change and environmental degradation constitute the largest threat that is exacerbating 
other existing shocks, and the limited adaptation capacity. However, the root causes of severe 
impacts are also intertwined with years of economic volatility, pervasive poverty, food and 
nutrition emergencies and inter-generational impacts of stunting, poor agricultural and natural 
resource management policy implementation, misuse of public and donor funds, and the lack of a 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

thriving private sector. The resulting land degradation is a core driver of other shocks and theseverity of natural disasters. There is extensive land degradation due to loss of forest coverage in 
Malawi especially in the south, which is highly degraded and impacted by both droughts and 
floods. Two districts in the north still have relatively high forest cover and density; however, 
poverty is also at 60-80 percent.9 In addition to land clearancefor agricultural expansion, othercauses of land degradation include fuel wood harvesting in urban peripheries, such as Blantyre, 
Lilongwe and Zomba. Moreover, limited and uncoordinated implementation of policies, such asthe Charcoal Strategy, National Forestry Policy, and the Energy Strategy, also lead to 
deforestation.10 Over 80%of national energy consumption uses forest biomass (fuelwood and 
charcoal).11 The impact on Malawi is devastating as deforestation is causing erosion, reduced 
watershed protection, which is in turn increasing vulnerability to severe shocks, resulting in 
cyclical climate-related food and nutrition emergencies, disrupting livelihoods, and long-term 
nutrition and health impacts. 

Climate-related shocks in Malawi have become the newnormal andare anticipated to increase inseverity and impact. Malawi is experiencing shorter rainy seasons, more periods of drought, with 
more rain falling on single day events and rising temperatures. Significantcrop yield impacts arealready being felt at 0.8°C warming, and as temperatures rise,climate change will add furtherpressure on Malawi’s agricultural and food systems, nutrition, social services, migration patterns, 
and infrastructure in urban and ruralareas. Recentobservableevents indicate that the frequency 
of extreme weather events in Malawi has increased- more droughts and floods have occurred in 
the last decade (2000– 2010) than in the past three decades before(1970 – 2000), with otherreports noting that 25% of the population has experienced drought seven ormore times during 
this decade, with similartrends in flood affected populations12

The impacts of climate change, and reductions inagricultural resilience and human capital will be 
felt most severely by poor, food insecure, and nutritionally vulnerable, and socially excluded 
groups, whose capacity to adapt to both rapid- and slow-onset climate change impacts is morelimited. These include migrant workers, women, girls, older people, and children. Climate changewill leave no industry unaffected, but Malawi’s agricultural economy is most vulnerable.

The GOM sees agricultural industrialization playing a central role for creating wealth and 
transforming Malawi, articulated in its Vision 2063. Strong growth in agribusiness will also beneeded to facilitate the economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis. Economic prospects largely 
hinge on the health of the agriculture sector and its ability to transform the sector with valueaddition and processing, to mobilize technology and to finance expand yield, productivity, sales, 
profit margins, competitiveness, and capacity of all actors within the sector. Malawi has done wellto become a major producer and exporter of high-demand commodities like tobacco, tea, and 

9Stateofthe World’s Forests, Foodand Agriculture Organization, 2020. Note thatthe correlation between forestcoverageanddensity andfoodinsecurityis suggestive,and this same correlationvaries inothercountries, where denselyforestedareas are also food insecure.
10NationalResilience Strategy,Breaking the Cycleof Food Insecurityin Malawi (2018-2030),Government ofMalawi, 2018.11Malawi: SystematicCountry Diagnostic, The World Bank Group, December 2018.12Government of Malawi,NationalResilienceStrategy, Breaking the Cycle ofFoodInsecurityin Malawi(2018-2030), 2018.


sugar, but exports continue to decline and businesses currently operating in these sectors are 
increasingly challenged. Even these successes belie the tremendous poverty and vulnerability 
among farming households. 

Decades of interventions and millions of GOM and donor funding designed to boost productivity 
and diversification through government and donor programs targeting smallholder farmers have 
largely failed to improve food security or create a more resilient, commercial agribusiness sector. 
Production remains reliant on rainfall, with concerns over basic food security keeping most 
farmers from diversifying away from maize production. 

People not working in agriculture are mostly employed in the informal sector. Nearly 9 out of 10 
jobs are informal. Three-quarters of Malawi’s firms consist of only the proprietor, with only 3.6 
percent of all nonfarm enterprises having four employees or more. This undermines the creation 
of a sufficient domestic tax revenue base for public investments. Worker migration is largely the 
result of negative factors that push labor off household farm plots rather than pull factors such as 
industrializing job growth or a growing entrepreneurial base across diverse sectors. The resources 
and energy needed to initiate development is regularly diverted by a cycle of food insecurity, 
droughts, floods, and other disasters. Malawi’s micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises 
(MSMEs) are largely informal -- made up of thousands of self-employed informal traders, 
craftsmen, and entrepreneurs. This private sector ecosystem is characterized by a “missing 
middle” due to the lack of formal, medium growing businesses. Despite being an invaluable part 
of the economy, the informal micro-enterprises tend to suffer from under-investment, stagnation, 
an unpredictable policy environment, lack of access to finance, high interest rates, lack of 
collateral by youth and women, non-adherence to quality standards, lack of streamlined and 
coherent licensing and taxing systems, lack of markets and trade, lack for formalized linkages to 
large firms, and rampant corruption. As a result, the informal micro-economy is stymied in its 
ability to expand, grow, and mature into more medium-sized businesses, which would operate 
within the formal economy, produce jobs, generate wealth, and contribute toward a sufficient 
domestic tax revenue for public investments. 

Now more than ever, Malawi needs new drivers of growth to jumpstart an economic recovery and 
help meet the jobs challenge of a rapidly growing, youthful population, which cannot be achieved 
without a thriving private sector. The population is growing at roughly 3 percent a year, meaning 
that the already densely populated country will likely double its citizenry within a generation. 
Three-quarters of Malawians are younger than 35, and over 40 percent are under age 14. An 
estimated 400,000 Malawians are entering the job force each year, and the economy is not 
growing at a pace to provide decent work. Even for those who do find work, most are 
underemployed. The latest government household survey (2020) found that 9 out of 10 
respondents were engaged in at least some income-generating activity over the survey’s preceding 
12-month period. But most of these activities were in temporary, informal farming and fishing 
work. In urban areas, where farming is more limited, roughly one quarter of all residents reported 
being unable to find work in the past 12 months. Only 1 in 10 Malawians over age 15 has a wage- 


or salary-paying job. Even those with a tertiary education struggle to find formal employment, 
with less than two-thirds finding a waged job. 

Solutions are Possible 

USAID’s programming has demonstrated the potential for using a model akin to developing 
growth poles to achieve inclusive and resilient economic growth, to complement social protection 
initiatives. Growth poles13 examples are globally available in one way or another and have acted 
as key instruments to overcome barriers to investment and to support the agglomeration of 
economic activity and have been promoted over the last decade throughout Africa. Growth 
poles14 are often discussed as simultaneous, coordinated investments in many sectors to support 
self-sustaining industrialization in a country or a geographic area with the potential to increase 
investments, jobs, and income growth. They bear resemblance to, but are not the same as, special 
economic zones (SEZs), which are spatially delimited areas within an economy. Examples 
include export processing zones, economic processing zones, free zones, and foreign trade zones. 
SEZs, as supply-side competitiveness measures, are aimed at overcoming barriers that hinder 
investment in the wider economy, including restrictive policies, poor governance, inadequate 
infrastructure, and problematic access to land. Growth poles, on the other hand, usually combine 
public and private investments and are specifically built around an already-existing 
resource at a specific location in an economy. The critical component is a localized inherent 
revenue producer with significant economic potential and/or a group of dynamic industries 
connected around a particular resource. These industries are, by virtue of their dimension or 
negotiation strength, anticipated to have the capacity to innovate and adapt to market 
conditions. It is a place where productive economic activities rapidly expand due to the presence 
of economies of scale and agglomeration, competition and cooperation, innovation, and 
backward/ forward linkages. 

13 https://www3.weforum.org/docs/ACR/2013/ACR_Chapter2.3_2013.pdf 

14https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/909171468009948878/pdf/840670REVISED00owth0Pole0Diagnostic.pdf 

The growth of dynamic industries is anticipated to generate further investment, employment, and 
distribution of factor payments, including profits that may be reinvested. Mineral deposits, tourist 
attractions, underexploited agricultural lands, large labor pools, or other geographic advantage 
could each serve as the foundation for localized growth. Growth poles sometimes require the 
presence of a basic infrastructure platform (roads, railroads, river transport, and electricity). And, 
particularly in Africa, proximity to markets or trade corridors to establish economic linkages with 
the wider economy. While one aspect of a growth pole approach involves improving the “hard” 
infrastructure (e.g., roads and ports), infrastructure is not by itself sufficient to make an economy 
competitive. The “soft” infrastructure, the regulations and policies that enhance or inhibit 
business formation and competitiveness, also require consideration. A growth pole strategy takes 
both the hard and soft actors into account through a spatially aware, proactive, multi-stakeholder 
approach. It looks to enhance local competitiveness and economic opportunity through strategic 


interventions such as capital infusion, public-private partnerships (PPPs) to build and upgrade 
infrastructure, and/or policy reforms that have the potential to attract further investment in such a 
way that it provides present stakeholders reason to buy-in to the reform process. A spatially aware 
approach supports efforts to reduce poverty. 

Growth poles are not, however, a panacea. They do not help everyone, everywhere, all at once. 
Yet, they have been shown to hold the potential to improve a country’s economic circumstances 
to a point at which they would have the internally generated resources to address policy 
challenges less directly spatial in nature, they crowd in shared interests and actors, and begin to 
have knock on effects. 

The growth of dominant industries, in turn, generates a positive ecosystem and external effects 
that stimulate the growth of other industries due to inter-industry linkages. Successful 
growth poles draw in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and create a virtuous circle. The increased 
investment encourages the formation of new firms and local industry. In certain types of labor-
intensive work, increased investment results in more jobs. This creates local wealth and increases 
the tax base for governments, which can use this revenue to expand access to critical services, 
such as health care, clean water, and education. 

 

Graphical user interface
Description automatically generated
In Malawi, companies of all sizes face limited energy, transport, and land related barriers 
inhibiting Malawi’s ability to increase FDI or stimulate medium and large domestic companies. 
With the pandemic expected to reduce international investment flows, Malawi will need its 
incumbent lead firms to drive investment. Many well-established local and international 
companies in Malawi have already been investing in diversification and value addition of 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION -72061222RFA00006

forestry, nut and fruit tree crops, legumes(soy and groundnuts), energy products (biomass, 
sustainable charcoal,and others, as well the development and commercialization of improved 
seed varieties and even rural tourism. The most active in doing so are the tobacco firms that areseeking to diversify theirlong-term business strategies as global demand decreases. Tea,
macadamia, and sugarcompanies, as well as other nut, forestry, and fruit companies arealsomaking strategic shifts and looking to expand their business models. Many of them havesmallholder farming models that can be leveraged and expanded, and others have expansivesupplier networks and the market power to drivebehavior change throughouttheir supply 
chains15. 

This activity will work in close coordination with MCC’s Compact II project, which is developing 
a roads infrastructure, accelerating agricultural farm-to-market corridors, deploying financing forsmallholder farmers, and strengthening local government (municipal) revenue collection and land 
management systems designed to drive productivity. USAID’s Democracy, Human Rights, and 
Governance (DRG) office is strengthening local government in key districts that improve localcapacitiesfor service provision. The Sustainable Economic Growth Office(SEG) is supporting 
the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL), Learn to PerformActivity and evidence-basedlearning to support GOM’s policy implementations. 

Creating more and betterjobs for Malawians requires the infrastructure, enabling environment, 
and good governance to foster economic transformation. Job creation, diversification and 
agriculture-led industrialization is at the center of its development agenda. For Malawi to seizetheseopportunities, the government will need to tackle long-standing governanceand policy 
implementation weaknesses, strengthen local governance and other system levers, and engagemore effectively with growth poles and existing, like-minded private sectorpartners to create 
economies of scale.

2.2USG AND DONOR ACTIVITY 
This activity will achieve results towards the Embassy Integrated Country Strategy (ICS)MissionGoal 2:To foster private sector expansion to build trade and employment opportunities and create 
a development trajectory that curves away from development assistance, resulting in inclusiveand sustainable wealth generation) and USAID/Malawi’s CDCS,Development Objective Three 
(DO-3): To advance a more inclusive, diversified, and resilient privatesector16that drivessustainable wealth creation). Both have a focus ensuring benefits are inclusive of and takeayouth-and gender-lens. The activity will generate results focused on DO-3 IR 3.1:Resilient 
Households, Communities, and Systems Manage and Reduce Vulnerabilities, IR3.2:Malawian 

15IMF Malawi Country PrivateSector Diagnostic (CPSD) June 202116Private sector is defined broadly in this activity description and includes micro, small, medium, and largebusinesses, individual entrepreneurs, farmers, cooperatives,social enterprises, conservation enterprises, businessassociations, and private financial institutions. USAID intends to work with and through alarge variety of privatesector actors, including large,well-capitalized,Malawian,and international businesses with high capacity, but thedevelopment impact intended is geared towards Malawian micro, small, and medium sized businesses and 
entrepreneurs, including farmers, women and youth that are needed for sustainablewealth generation.


Firms' Economic Competitiveness Increased, IR 3.3: Enabling environment for wealth creation 
improved, and DO Sub IR 3.3.1 Natural Resources Sustainably Managed and improved. 

The activity will advance the Mission’s strategic approaches: Broader partnerships, Bolder 
Selectivity and Better Approaches. Broader partnerships will diversify the partner base and the 
ways in which awards are made and managed, with a focus on working with and through private 
sector actors through sub-grants and partnership arrangements. Bolder selectivity prioritizes 
investments where there is greater commitment and ownership, by private sector partnerships, as 
well as Government of Malawi and key community and local stakeholders. Better approaches 
bring innovative and catalytic interventions and implementation approaches (e.g., systems based) 
to complex development problems, looking for opportunities to be transformative in areas such as 
seed systems, climate finance, expansion of technologies, expansion of value-addition, and 
innovative financing solutions. These approaches are designed to help implement the 
Government of Malawi (GOM) Vision 2063 and should also be closely aligned with USAID’s 
Private Sector Engagement Policy and Strategies. Through this approach, USAID/Malawi will 
focus energies on aligning itself with new and current local partners and/or non-traditional 
partners, in particular the private sector for this activity, invest where there is demonstrated 
commitment and political will for change, and use an integrated approach across sectors to 
untangle some of Malawi’s most intractable development challenges. 

2.3 PURPOSE AND EXPECTED RESULTS 

The purpose of this activity is to accelerate environmentally, socially, and economically 
sustainable, resilient, and more inclusive wealth generation in Malawi by mobilizing rural-
based private sector investments and partnerships with anchor firms and their surrounding 
communities, smallholder organizations, cooperatives, and MSMEs in a growth pole 
approach, with a youth and gender lens. It will build on the strong foundation of early growth 
pole development established by the FTF Agricultural Diversification (AgDiv) activity. 

For this activity, the concept of a growth pole is a location centered around anchor firms that 
have internal economies of scale, provide a sustainable motor for growth, and can deliver 
positive benefits for surrounding areas; these may also center on a specific industry hub, or a 
geographic location like a municipality, or a specific value chain region17. In Malawi, growth 
poles will be developed and strengthened with and through anchor firms (or several firms) that 
have long-term business strategies that are inherently inclusive (incorporate smallholder farmers, 
for example) and climate-positive and resilient (dependent on improved soil and watershed 
health), with robust environment, social and governance (ESG) strategies, and existing hard and 
soft infrastructure, that have a need of partnerships that can catalyze economic growth, resilience, 
and inclusivity results. Most companies in Malawi that fit this concept operate in the agricultural, 
food, energy, forestry, agroforestry and/or tourism sectors. 

17 While a single company may provide the anchor for the growth pole concept, it could just as easily be composed of 
several firms, MSMEs or farmers in the same industry or value chain. 


Using a growth pole approach, driven by private sector actors, USAID will help catalyze rural 
economic growth transformation, strategically building a critical mass of multiple value-chain 
and/or geographically linked partnerships, product and service providers that have downstream 
and upstream impacts on jobs and incomes, resilience, and greater inclusivity of women and 
youth, e.g. broader positive impacts. The activity will, through private-sector partnerships 
arranged by the Recipient, layer in or bundle resilience, inclusivity, and climate activities, 
building on private sector resources and capacities to expand outcomes in these areas. The activity 
will bring a resilience lens that strengthens systems and structures to build capacities, productive 
assets and human capital, leveraging diverse resources to achieve climate adaptation, natural 
resource management, and inclusion elements in private sector-led strategies and partnerships. 
The activity will seek partnerships that provide sustainable pathways out of poverty in the face of 
shocks and stresses, in particular climate change and population growth. 

The activity will result in increased incomes and assets (among smallholder farmers, youth and 
women), new or improved employment opportunities, improved agricultural productivity, more 
resilient households, improved access to and use of climate-positive, climate-smart technologies, 
significantly expanded sustainably managed and improved natural resources (soils, water, 
forests), a larger, better organized, and competitive ecosystem of micro, small, and medium 
enterprises, farmers and communities, sustainable access to finance, expanded production of value 
added products, expanded exports, and private sector resource mobilization. It will have shared 
results with other programs by complementing and seeking integrated approaches that result in 
strengthened local governance and municipal, district and national service provision, improved 
enabling policy environment and produce evidence for adaptive management and take part in 
communities of practice. 

The activity will foster long-term, sustainable development models that leverage private sector 
actors, strengthen public sector support for and foster greater joint investments in resilient 
agriculture-led and other diversified rural development approaches. The project is designed to 
mobilize and/or solidify current and new private sector led partnerships with surrounding 
communities so that investments are sustained long past the end of this activity. 

The activity will work with the private sector to identify opportunities for new, expanded and/or 
improved resilience approaches that generate longer-term investments and commitments that are 
not donor driven, building assets in local communities, and providing greater protection for 
households and communities most vulnerable to shocks and stresses. The activity will adopt a 
partnership model and will involve collaborative work planning with USAID and private sector 
actors at the start, as well as on-going throughout the life of the activity. The activity will align 
with and collaborate closely across Malawi’s multisectoral approaches and strengthen a range of 
resilience capacities and assets, such as physical, financial, environmental, social, and political. 

This activity will need several key approaches to achieve the objectives outlined below, but will 
be inherently responsive and flexible, able to adapt and take advantage of and respond to 
diverse private sector partnership opportunities with potential for broad based economic 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006growth andresilience in Malawi’s rural sector,deploying a diverse setof tools and strategiesto partner with companies where there is best value added. As such, the activity has not pre-
identified specific valuechains, does not limited the activity to farm-basedor agriculturalactivities, and does not limit opportunities geographically18.Outcomes will necessarily be flexiblebased on private-sector partnerships that are developed, with targeted results jointly developed 
with companies during early implementation of the activity. Rural economic diversification and 
commercialization opportunities will remain broad and will be analyzed and selected according to 
their potential to produce results in line with the purpose of theactivity and may includeopportunities in the sustainable tourism, forestry, or energy sectors. 

USAID/Malawi intends to build on the success ofits current project, Agricultural Diversification 
Activity (AgDiv), initially partnering with several established relationships with large, well-
capitalized, high-capacity domestic and international private sector actors in order to leveragetheir long-term agricultural growth and diversification strategies and investments19. Growth Poleswill work with both existing and new anchor firms20, industry leaders, growing medium-sizedcooperatives, and enterprises, and will develop other innovative, promising public-private 
partnerships that can advance and leverage directandindirect benefits around economic zones, 
watersheds, growth corridors or geographic growth poles. Where feasible, the activity willpromote U.S.-Malawi trade and investments, foster new investments21, and engage and coordinatewith Prosper Africa and regional trade hubs. 

An effort to influenceand account for indirect benefits (e.g., spillovers, knock-on effects,
secondary effects, etc.) is a unique expectation of this activity. This is an important component ofthe growth pole approach, to have an impact within and beyond the immediate core private sectorpartnership activity – that reaches individuals, households, and communities in and surrounding 
the growth pole to stimulate broad-basedeconomic growth22. The activity will leverage andstrengthen the agricultural sector and specific high-potential commodity systems as sector-basedgrowth poles. 

The wealth to becreated through and by the private sector will bolster the socio-economic well-
being ofMalawians in an inclusive manner, while protecting critical aspects of the naturalresource base, such as soils, watersheds, forests, the quality and quantity of waterresources, 
fisheries, and other biodiversity. Socio-economic well-being includesincreased food security and 
improved nutritional status; increased incomes, assets, and wealth; reduced poverty; increased 
access to employment and livelihood opportunities; increased access to and quality of education 
and health services; and improved household and community resilience to respond to a wide

18Further clarity to geographic areas is explained later–but the activitywill build on strong partnerships already 
developed in theFtFZone ofInfluence and Resilience Zoneof Influence.
19See section 2.5.4 for a map of current AgDiv main private sector partners akin to growth pole partners.
20Not limited to the large well-capitalized, high-capacity firms, but can include medium size private sector partners.
21More likely brown field rather than green field investmentsfor larger scale ventures.
22The indirecteffectsor impacts might be negative or unintended consequences which should also be accounted 
for.


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

variety of shocksand stressors. Increased well-being, resilience, and incomes for vulnerablehouseholds will only be possible through a broader-based, multi-sectoral, and inclusive (women-
and youth-led) private sector landscape that generates growth andcompetitiveness among diverse 
Malawian entrepreneursand MSMEs, as well as an improved business enabling environment23that stimulates private sector investment and growth.

2.4PRIMARYACTIVITY OBJECTIVES
The purpose of this activity is to accelerate environmentally, socially, and economically 
sustainable, resilient, and more inclusive wealth generation in Malawi by mobilizing rural-basedprivate sector investments and partnerships with anchor firms and their surrounding communities, 
smallholder organizations, cooperatives, and MSMEs in a growth pole approach, with afocus on 
ensuring benefits are inclusive of smallholders, youth, and women. 

2.4.1 DEVELOPMENTHYPOTHESIS
The activity’s development hypothesis is based on the premise thatsustainable, resilient,and 
inclusive wealth generation in Malawi will be created more quickly.

●if responsible anchor firms are identified, enabled, and de-risked to create or accelerate 
shared-value investments through strategic partnerships in economic growth poles, 
●and these partnerships incorporate improved natural resource management, climatepositive and resilienceactions into their business plans which are sustainable and inclusiveof upstream and downstream actors, 
●then Malawi's private sector will expand, becomemore competitive and will ensureeconomic growth is inclusive, sustainable, strengthens household, communities, and 
resilient systems, and is environmentally sustainable,
●and a vibrant rural economy can grow, enabling Malawians to generate wealth and 
improve their socioeconomic well-being. 
A.2.4.2.1OBJECTIVES AND EXPECTED RESULTS
The objectives of this activity will be accomplished with and through anchor firms which havelong-term strategies andbusiness cases that overlap with the activity’s intended developmentimpacts. It is understood that a fundamental way of achieving theactivity goal and objectivesmust be withhighly leveraged private sectorresources, innovation, and initiatives – a truly privatesector-led theory of change24. 

23How to account for this is addressed later in the section on Program and Activity Integration.
24Resources can be of many different forms, be they financial and in-kind, expanded credit,expanded purchasing,
etc. as well as human capital,such as industry leaders becoming agents of change.


This activity will help private sector firms expand, using USAID as a partner to bring added value 
and mitigate risks in order to jointly address key barriers to growth while simultaneously fostering 
the ecosystem around the growth poles. USAID sees this activity as supporting SMEs and off-
farm jobs in and around these private sector-led growth clusters that support anchor companies’ 
long-term market system expansion strategies. USAID will play a role to help private sector long-
term expansion strategies to be inclusive, reach greater numbers of productive small holder 
farmers, ensure environmental sustainability, and increase resilience. USAID also will support a 
portfolio of interrelated and complementary partnerships that collectively make the agricultural 
sector, specific commodities, business enterprises, and communities drivers of broader economic 
growth, i.e., growth poles. The activity focuses on building on and leveraging existing and new 
high-potential partnerships between private sector firms (with not exclusively large firms but 
could include medium size operations) and organized smallholder producers addressing key 
barriers that limit growth, to drive substantial increases in household income and economic 
growth in the surrounding communities and diversify on and off farm jobs in both agriculture and 
complementary rural sectors. The activity will work with select companies where development 
impact, company strategies and investments align to CDCS and where the GOM intends to create 
economic zones. 

A results framework with objectives and key results expected by the end of the activity are in 
Annex 5 and mentioned below under each relevant Objective Expected Result. 

Objective 1: Develop and/or strengthen growth poles that leverage and expand private 
sector investments25 

25 Wealth creation, building the foundation for improved rural incomes and assets. 

26 At the firm, individual, household and community level. 

27 Layering refers to implementing together the approaches under this objective with the approaches under the other 
objectives in the same space and perhaps same location. Sequencing refers to the timing or phasing when these 
approaches are implemented in the same space or location. The objective is to maximize overall impact. 

Illustrative Approaches: 

● Identify responsible companies with long-term business plans that are well-aligned with 
USAID’s development goals. 
● Develop and manage effective and innovative private sector partnerships with these 
companies that leverage and significantly accelerate or increase private sector investment, 
capacities, and infrastructure – playing a role to unlock, enable, and/or de-risk shared-
value approaches that evolve into a growth pole. 
● Develop hybrid financing models that support economic activities around specific value 
chain growth poles. 
● Include social, environmental and governance strategies26 that increase informal and 
formal arrangements with upstream and downstream actors, including smallholder 
farmers, cooperatives, and/or MSMEs. 
● Layer in and sequence with other main objectives27. 



● Leverage other investments in coordination with Government, NGOs, Civil Society, other 
USAID resources, and other development partner and institutional projects, initiatives, and 
programs. 
● Demand-driven R&D - linking research and development resources to those who can best 
use and adopt it. 


 

Expected Results: 

● Sustainable and inclusive economic growth poles created that are private sector led, 
created and/or strengthened in partnership with progressive, responsible, like-minded 
private sector firms sharing USAID’s development goals. 
o At least 20 growth poles developed and/or strengthened 



● Increased assets and resources (financial, human capital, infrastructure, technologies, land, 
and natural resources) leveraged by working with private sector and other Growth Pole 
partners and actors. 
o $500 million leveraged and/or mobilized from the private sector in shared value 
impacts 



● Regional and US-Malawi trade expanded. 
o Two-fold (2x) increase on value addition and/or exports (where exports are 
applicable) over baseline 





Objective 2: Strengthen systems resilience through improved climate and natural resource 
management 

Illustrative Approaches: 

● Foster private sector-led sustainable forestry products and services and other climate positive 
businesses 
● Actively work with identified partners to reduce and reverse environmental degradation 
through improved integrated natural resource management (NRM), soil amendments, 
watershed management, erosion control, reforestation, forestry plantations, riparian 
protection, assisted natural regeneration and other NRM interventions within the identified 
growth pole’s geographic area 
● Test payment for ecosystem services 
● Assess and pilot climate finance models 
● Promote technologies and investments that transform system resilience, such as soil health 
and seed systems 
● Work collaboratively to leverage and strengthen local governance and district land planning 
and governance systems 


 

Expected Results 


● Rehabilitated and recovered watersheds and micro-catchments, including assisted natural 
regeneration 
○ 150,000 hectares of forests and watersheds rehabilitated and conserved 



● Improved natural resource management, including soils28, water, forests and watersheds; 
reduced deforestation and watershed, reduce soil and forest degradation 
○ 30,000 arable hectares under improved soil and water management 



● Improved climate resilience through integrated, private sector-led approaches related to 
climate-smart agriculture, fisheries, forestry and food systems, watershed management, 
regenerated forests, and governance29; 
○ Improved climate-smart seed and/or seedlings accessed by 500,000 farmers 



● Increased contribution to greenhouse emissions mitigation and reduction. 
● Profitable businesses established and supported that are forestry- and/or NRM- and 
biodiversity- friendly 


28 Particularly soil health under smallholder agricultural systems. 

29 Leading to substantially increased absorption of rainwater, recharged groundwater tables, and reduced flooding 
and soil erosion. 

 

Objective 3: Expand inclusive development that increases smallholders, youth and women 
incomes, assets, and jobs while also strengthening household and community resilience 

Illustrative Approaches: 

● Under the Growth Poles, work with strategic partners and key stakeholders to proactively 
create economic opportunities for smallholders, youth, and women, by targeting youth-
owned, youth-led, women-owned, women-led businesses and youth and female 
entrepreneurs and leaders. 
● Promote gender equity and ensure gender and youth issues are suitably addressed 
throughout the activity, such as ensure youth and women can effectively participate in 
supported farmer groups, structured contracts, have access to improved inputs (seeds, 
technologies, extension) and have access to finance initiatives, such as Village Savings 
and Lending Associations (VSLAs) linked to banks and/or microcredit. 
● Enhance youth and women market-led capacities, enhancing their business skills, financial 
literacy, market linkages, and increased direct contracting and business service 
relationships with other companies. 
● Develop a learning agenda to better understand unique youth and differentiated gender 
needs and how growth poles can address those, in an adaptive learning and management 
approach. 



● Strengthen ability of individuals and households to manage risks, prepare for, mitigate, 
and adapt to shocks and stresses, increasing their resilience and food security. 


Expected Results: 

● Incomes, assets, and jobs increased for youth aged 18 to 35: 
○ At least 120,000 farmers with direct and/or formal linkages to market (e.g. 
contract farmers, entrepreneurs); of these at least 50% must be women and/or 
youth. 



● Women’s participation in economic activities and incomes, assets and jobs increased. 
○ Direct beneficiaries’ increase their incomes and assets by 100% (double) and 
indirect beneficiaries (Zone of Influence (ZOI) / district level) increase incomes 
and assets by 10% 
○ At least 120,000 farmers with direct and/or formal linkages to market (e.g., 
contract farmers); of these at least 50% must be women and/or youth. 



● Greater gender equality, women and youth empowerment, and enhanced economic 
inclusion among all beneficiaries, especially economically disadvantaged or marginalized 
groups 
● Improved smallholder farmer productivity and incomes, food security, and resilience 
through significant adoption of advancements in agricultural technologies, management 
practices, and improved market linkages 


 

o 300% increase in productivity (and/or yields) of direct beneficiaries over baseline 

o At least 120,000 farmers with direct and/or formal linkages to market (e.g., contract farmers); 
of these at least 50% must be women and/or youth. 

● Increased beneficiary adoption of appropriate, climate-positive new technologies 
● Value-added and processing increased across diverse sectors expanded and made more 
accessible and competitive 
○ 200% increase in value addition and/or exports (where exports are applicable) 
over baseline30 



● Increased resilience among direct and indirect beneficiaries in growth poles 


30 Shared indicator with Objective 1 Expected Results 

 


○ 50% increase in household resilience as measured by Rapid Feedback Monitoring 
System (RFMS) methodologies in targeted Growth Pole zone of influence 
○ At least 100,000 institutions, communities and/or households utilizing climate or 
other data sources and information or implementing risk-reducing actions to 
improve resilience to climate change: climate-smart seed and/or seedlings 
accessed by farmers 


● Increased engagement between MSMEs, farmers, cooperatives across innovative, multi-
win partnership models and with growth poles and anchor/large firms 
○ Direct MSME beneficiaries increase profit or sales by 100%; of these at least 
50% must be women and/or youth. 





Objective 4: Mobilize innovative, impact-oriented credit and finance 

Illustrative Approaches 

● Develop new financial approaches, products, access, and structures. 
● Provide catalytic capital to attract and/or de-risk and expand private investment. 
● Increase access to credit for MSME, smallholder farmers, youth, and women, and 
strengthen linkages between informal and formal credit. 


 

 

Expected Results 

● Catalytic capital mobilized and leveraged towards broadly shared economic gain 
throughout a value chain and/or growth pole. 
○ $500 million leveraged and/or mobilized from the private sector in shared value 
impacts31 



● Access to credit expanded for women, youth, smallholder farmers, MSMEs. 
● Increased access to and utilization of financial services including credit, savings, and other 
products. 
○ At least $30 million in innovative financing (credit or equity) deployed to MSMEs 
(including farmers); of these at least 50% must be women and/or youth. 





31 Shared indicator with Objective 1 Expected Results 


Objective 5: Play a networking, facilitating, coordination and adaptive role based on 
evidence and data within Malawi 

Illustrative Approaches: 

● Strengthen network of growth pole and ecosystem actors 
● Coordinate with GOM, Donors, USAID, implementing partners, private sector actors, 
civil society, NGOs, farmers organization and any other key stakeholder operating across 
and between growth poles to leverage impact together 
● Build and share evidence, learning and data 
● Proactively contribute to policy discussions for an enabling policy 
● Use evidence-based, iterative implementation and adaptation techniques and strategies 


 

Expected Results 

● Data and evidence shared 
● Better coordination and generated results 
o Number (TBD) of integration interventions completed and/or initiated in 
collaboration with USAID/Malawi partners or development partners 



● Community of practice, network and synergies built 
● Barriers to private sector growth and investments within the enabling environment 
collaboratively addressed. 


 

2.4.3 TARGET POPULATION 

These growth poles will act as engines of economic growth with substantial revenues and profits 
that drive local economies, with spillover effects32 for those who are not direct beneficiaries – 
stimulating opportunities for on-farm and off-farm income-generating opportunities for thousands 
of additional beneficiaries. This is an important feature of this activity that is often not 
considered, acknowledged, measured, or reported on. Thus, direct beneficiaries engaging directly 
within growth pole partnerships will include the anchor firms/growth poles themselves, 
smallholder farmers, entrepreneurs, MSMEs, cooperatives, and other value chain actors, with a 
focus on youth and women. Indirect beneficiaries within the growth pole sphere of influence/ 

32 Sometimes referred to as knock-on, secondary, etc. effects that are both positive and negative, intentional, or 
unintentional. 


communities are expected to benefit at household, community and systems levels, from various 
entry points: (a) direct participation in the activity (e.g. labor income), (b) on-farm and off-farm 
employment, diversified income sources and business opportunities generated as a result of the 
activity, (c) increased access to services, products, enhanced community safety nets, and 
infrastructure (improved seed, improved technologies, energy, markets, transport, other 
infrastructure, digital technology, health, education, etc.). and (d) GOM will benefit from 
improved revenues generated from expanded exports. 
Households and communities outside an immediate growth pole zone of influence (discussed 
below) may be targeted for interventions related to resilience, NRM, youth and women-oriented 
interventions. See the following related discussion. 

2.4.4 GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS 

Diagram Description automatically generated
The geographic focus will be on and around 
the growth poles ‘zone of influence’. 
Although the scope of this activity is 
nationwide, there could be advantages to 
bundling, linking, and coordinating Growth 
Poles interventions in defined areas, and it is 
expected that the activity will build upon 
existing growth poles already established, as 
these have a strong foundation to accelerate 
impacts through this activity. Since many of 
the existing growth poles are in the FtF zone 
of influence (FtF ZOI), and Resilience Focus 
Zone (RFZ), it is likely that the activity will 
continue to work in these geographic areas as new partnerships and growth poles are identified 
and developed in other geographies. 

However, the Growth Poles activity has not pre-identified specific value chains, nor limited the 
activity to farm-based or agricultural activities only and does not limit opportunities 
geographically. See the map which provides the names of the well-established private sector 
firms AgDiv has partnered with and their geographic location. The Venn diagram above depicts 
the expected layering, sequencing, and integration of the basic Growth Poles activities related to 
what was discussed earlier33. What it indicates is that there are going to be interventions and 
beneficiaries directly engaged with a growth pole that will see increased incomes and assets (an 
example might be contract farmers, or contract cooperative), and there might be specific land and 
natural resource management interventions also under direct influence (expanded agroforestry 
systems); but there are also going to be spillover impacts radiating out from those, as indirect 

33 The activities are grouped slightly differently than the Growth Pole program objectives. 


Map Description automatically generated
beneficiaries, both on the watershed and soil management, as well as the increased household 
resilience, MSME development and job creation. 
The geographical reach of a growth pole is determined by the footprint of this infrastructure, 
which may include physical infrastructure, like roads and utilities, as well as softer infrastructure, 
such as extension networks, contracting 
relationships, or the reach of community 
engagement programs. The growth pole 
approach leverages additional investment 
and strategic insight from these permanent 
private sector actors that have commercial 
incentives to build community resilience to 
amplify impact and achieve sustainability. 
Growth poles provide an opportunity to 
support both the primary value chains that 
comprise each growth pole partner’s 
infrastructure footprint, as well as 
developing secondary value chains that 
complement the primary value chains and 
build on potential opportunities for linkages 
across different growth pole partners. 

 

 

3. ACTIVITY PARAMETERS AND 
CROSS-CUTTING CONSIDERATIONS 

This activity will need to deploy diverse and innovative strategies to achieve its goals, adapted to 
each unique set of partnerships/anchor firms/growth pole context. 

Additionally, the activity is not pre-identifying any value chains to allow for greater private sector 
partnership possibilities and strategic engagement around the highest-potential growth 
opportunities. There are several large tobacco, tea, macadamia, nut and fruit, forestry, energy, and 
sugar companies that have long-term strategies to diversify into new products working with 
smallholder out grower and organized farmer arrangements. The activity builds on current 
successful private-sector led partnerships that rely tools and resources from USAID in order to 
diversify into scaled seed production systems, especially for legumes, groundnuts, soy and other 
legume crops, oilseeds and macadamia, fruit and horticulture and/or other high value products, 
increase value addition and processing, establish sustainable forestry-based products and services, 
while promoting and helping scale climate-resilient varieties, technologies and systems. Many of 
these value chains are aligned with the priorities set out in the National Agriculture Investment 
Plan (NAIP), National Resilience Strategy (NRS) and National Export Strategy (NES). 


 3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE CONSIDERATIONS 

Section 117 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in 22 CFR 216 and in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) 
Parts 201.3.4.5 and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/), which, in part, require that the 
potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 

In accordance with 22 CFR 216, the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for activities being 
implemented by USAID/Malawi relevant to this activity is the July 2021 USAID/Malawi Private 
Sector Engagement Activities Development Objective-3 (July 2021 – July 2026) IEE. 

The Recipient shall integrate environmental compliance considerations into the project work plan 
and report on them in the normal basis of project reporting. USAID/Malawi SEG Office FtF 
Team shall assure that this integration occurs. This reporting will be incorporated into pertinent 
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Plans and annual work plans to be submitted to 
USAID/Malawi. 

The Recipient will notify USAID/Malawi SEG Office FtF Team of any work plan activities 
outside the scope of the approved in the IEE, and the FtF Team will independently audit the work 
plan against the scope of the IEE. The Recipient, in consultation with AOR, and the Mission 
Environmental Officer (MEO), as appropriate, will actively monitor and evaluate whether 
environmental consequences unforeseen under activities covered by the IEEs. If additional 
activities are added that are not described in the proposed activity document, IEEs must be 
amended and be approved prior to implementation of the new activities. 

In addition, the Recipient must comply with Malawi’s environmental regulations unless otherwise 
directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between Malawi and USAID regulations, the 
latter shall govern. 

3.2 CLIMATE CHANGE INTEGRATION 

Climate change is a cross cutting issue that is having significant impacts on regional, national, and 
local development efforts in all sectors. In recognition of that fact, in 2014 President Obama 
signed Executive Order (EO) 13677 which requires all US agencies to factor climate change into 
their foreign assistance planning and manage the associated climate risks. In addition, a country’s 
development trajectory can significantly influence its emissions of the greenhouse gasses (GHGs) 
that cause climate change. 

Per the CDCS DO-3 Project Appraisal Document (PAD), the climatic risk ratings were high for 
IR3.1 and IR3.2, and moderate for IR 3.3 – all of which is directly relevant to the Growth Poles 
Activity. Changing climate conditions could increase pests and diseases in crops, and flooding 
leads to the disruption of supply chains, either through damaged infrastructure or damaged crops. 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

Watershed and deforestation exacerbate soil loss and cause erosion, increasing siltation ofwaterways and risking dam infrastructure; when flooding or drought occurs, power supply, roadsand irrigation are impacted. The increased frequency and intensity of climate shocks lead to 
decrease of productivity of value chains.34Access to nutritious food is limited due to limitedproduction because ofclimate stressors,including decreased nutrition in crops due to increased 
temperatures; crop loss during extreme weather events; and crop production reduced due to 
growing at their thermal tolerance. Climate stressors (heat waves, floods, droughts) leading to 
extreme food insecurity have negative implications for education and health in later life.Because 
of these increasing climate shocks and stressors, there is a need for behavior change techniques to 
improve personal and community resilience, which have had limited success. 

3.3PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT
Private Sector Engagement (PSE) is a strategic approach to planning and programming through 
which USAID consults, strategizes, aligns, collaborates, and implements with the private sectorfor greater scale, sustainability, and effectivenessof development or humanitarian outcomes.35This is exactly the core approach of this growth pole activity, to precisely follow this approach 
outlined in section A.2 above. The development experience in Malawi has clearly shown that theprivate sectorcan certainly help, as can donors, but each by itself cannot expand ruraleconomicgrowth or address the myriad causes of household food insecurity, lack of resilience nor reducehousehold poverty. Thus, one of the main aspectsof this activity is to create strong, mutually 
beneficial,and accountable partnerships with private sector anchor firms to use market-basedapproaches to address these challenges together. USAID will depend heavily on carefully 
selected private sector leaders, their businessandstrategic acumen, resources, knowledge, and 
social responsibility interests that dovetail with the Malawi mission’s technical support,funds, 
and development interests. USAID has gained valuable experience from the outgoing FtFactivity36. This has confirmed the basic premise--that our support can becatalytic in helping theprivate sector overcomesome constraints they have faced in getting involved and investing in 
many of the activities proposed by this activity. It is USAID’s role asa major donor and uniquetechnical competences that attracts the private sector, making them eager partners with resourcesfar greater than USAIDcould ever provide on itsown. 

This activity will build on lessons learned around PSE from the AgDiv activity, and fromUSAID’s agency-wide PSE toolbox and GDA partnership principles. Forexample, in choosing 
private sector partners, the implementing partner should carry out due diligence, apply similarcriteria and demonstrate shared value with selected partners.

This activity will need to develop a Private Sector Partnership Approach with a documented 
framework, criteria and key steps that will be used to structure theprivate sector led partnerships

34Extracted from the CDCS DO-3 PAD discussion on Climate Risk (Executive Order13677).
35Drawn fromUSAID’s PrivateSector Engagement Policy:

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/usaid_psepolicy_final.pdf

36Especially successful use of agency Resilience Challenge Funds


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

anticipated under the activity. The structure should align with the PSE Policy and use USAID’sPSE toolbox, including frameworks on Global Development Alliances to guide partnership 
development, including criteria for good partnerships37, due diligence research, and formalization 
of the partnership through a Memorandum ofUnderstanding. 

3.4COORDINATION DURING IMPLEMENTATION 
Cross-cutting enablers or objectives will be required -- including strong coordination with theGOM38, major donor projects, MCC, and other USAID activities in and around chosen growth 
poles to ensure maximum synergies, avoid duplication of effort, conflicts, and confusion, and to 
achievea robust Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning/Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation 
(MEL/CLA) approach.In the same vein, these enablers are expected to assist with many of the 
infrastructural capital-intensive investments of a growth pole such roads, electrical power, etc. 
that are often considered in the public domain of responsibility.39The Recipientwill be asked toreport in its quarterly reports the role it has played in integrating,coordinating, andbuilding synergies, networks and a community of practice in its growth poles with otherstakeholders.

As it was for AgDiv, broad technical and strategic USAID mission and agency resources can bebrought to bear to facilitate and support achievement of the activity objectives40. It is understood 
there are challenges and limitations of the enabling macro-economic environment regarding 
policy, regulations, business investment conditions, etc. that can have an important effect on 
achieving activity objectives which are not the direct responsibility of this Growth Poles activity. 
However, as outlined in the USAID CDCS and by design, resources in DO-1 will be madeavailable as much as possible to address these issues. This will require close coordination and 
collaboration with actorsin DO-1 facilitated by the mission SEG Office. There could be otheravenues to address policy and regulatory issuesand concernsfrom institutions such asInternationalFood Research Institute (IFPRI), Malawi Agricultural Policy Advancement and 
Transformation Agenda (MwAPATA), and Donor Committee in Agriculture and Food Security 

37The applicableprinciples arethose found in USAID’s GDA private sector engagement due diligence, standards ofResponsible Agriculture Investment (RAI), UNCTAD’s Principles of Responsible Agricultural Investment (PRAI),
Agriculture Labor Practices (ALP), etc. The activity should work with companies that have responsible, inclusive,
non-exploitative, and environmentally sound business practices; companies should have a robust Environmental,
Social and Governance(ESG) policy and ideally impact reporting. The activity should beattentive to partnership 
structuresand incentives toavoid private sector growth thatincreasesmarginalization, inequality, negatively impactscommunities and/or degrades theenvironment.

38At the national,district and local level –such as the Ministries of Local Government, Natural Resources and 
Climate Change, Agriculture,Trade,and Industry, etc.
39In particular, the possible MCC compact is an example of symbiotic support with which the activity cancoordinate.Another opportunity to support this activity might emergefrom the May 2022 launching of the MalawiSecondary Cities Plan promoted by the National Planning Commission. There appear to beseveralpossiblelinkagesthat could be developed around urban development,transportation,and infrastructure, as well as agro-industrial 
activities in the Plan.
40For example, the agency’s innovation labs, Bureau of Resilience and Food Security Resilience Center, private 
sector engagement facilitiessuch as Prosper Africa, USAID INVEST, etc.


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION -72061222RFA00006

(DCAFS)41if relevant concerns and issuesraised and experienced by the Growth Poles and 
activity partners are proactively shared with themfor them to take up.

The activity is expected to adopt a holistic approach to improve the socio-economic well-being ofMalawians.Therefore, whereappropriate, the activity should take advantage of opportunities to 
crowd in and promote diversified strategies that integrate and receive support from many otherUSAID mission objectives, such asyouth-orientedinterventions that are a significant part of theMission CDCS DO-2 and DO-1 on improved household nutrition42. For example, this mightapply to addressing dietary deficiencies through production and market-led interventions through 
strengthening supply of nutritious foods, utilization of income to meet nutritional needs, and 
integration of food safety, food loss and waste outcomes. 

Since this activity is initiated under the mission’sFtF program managed by the SEG Office, theoffice wants to ensurea close link and symbiotic working relationship is established between 
Growth Poles and the portfolio of SEG programs. This refers to the support the Growth Poles can 
get for watershed management activities and activities to support vulnerable households wherethere is likely to be location and subject matter overlap in the FtF and Resilience ZOIs. Below is a 
list of the current SEG Officeactivity portfolio and those of the other Mission offices can beprovided as needed and relevant:

Feed the Future (FtF)

●AgDiv, in which we expect at least a 3-month overlap and smooth transition
●Youth Business Acceleration and Investment Facility (YBAIF)
●Moringa Value Chain Enterprise Development (MOVED) Activity in Malawi
●Policy -MwAPATA, MSU, IFPRIconsortium
●ATI and Illovo GDA-pendingEnvironment:
●Modern Cooking for Healthy Forests (Tiphike Mwa Makono)
●Restoring Fisheries for Sustainable Livelihoods in Lake Malawi (REFRESH)
●Strengthening InclusiveAgriculture SectorGrowth and Sustainable Natural Resources
Governance in MalawiBHA:

●Titukalane
●WFP
●UNICEFMission-wide:
●AgricultureSector Wide Approach (ASWAp)Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF)
41IFPRI and MwAPATA are analytical and research organizations while the Donor Committee in Agriculture andFood Security (DCAFS) is a high-level donor coordination platform.
42As outlined in the CDCS integration theme around health, education,governance,and youth interventions.


● Rapid Feedback Monitoring System (RFMS) 
● Social Protection - Enhanced Climate Public Works (MDTF pending) 
● Zomba and Mangochi G2G in Health 
● Governance for Solutions 
● Parliament activity 
● MOMENTUM - HPN 
● MEL - Learn to Perform, RFMS, IFPRI 


Key donor programs: 

● World Bank Social Protection and Expanded Climate Public Works 
● World Bank Watershed Management project 
● World Bank Agricultural Commercialization 
● Shire Valley Transformation Project 
● MCC Compact II 


 

3.5 FOSTERING SUSTAINABILITY AND LOCAL CAPACITY 

USAID/Malawi works to foster sustainability and local capacity building, and inherently the 
entire activity is designed to ensure that Malawi can decrease its dependence on development 
assistance by growing its private sector to sustain its own development pathway. The activity will 
be expected to engage with new and underutilized partners, incorporating the six principles 
articulated in new partners initiative and to practice the 10 principles for engaging local systems. 

 

With the expectation that sustainability through private sector processes will require the activity 
to work with companies or partners of companies as sub-grantees, or in innovative financing 
arrangement, and that making companies and MSME and farmers more profitable is a part of the 
theory of change. 

The implementing partner must clearly outline how proposed activities will foster sustainability 
and local capacity and national self-reliance to achieve the Growth Poles activity goal and 
objectives and will be required to demonstrate how sustainability will take place well beyond 
the life of the activity. USAID emphasizes the importance of utilizing local systems and 
resources (including multinational firms resident in Malawi). Emphasis must be placed on the 
human and institutional capacity development of local non-governmental and for-profit 
institutions by taking a facilitation role and delivering most of the assistance through existing 
private sector firms, farmer groups, Village Savings and Loans (VSLs), local financial and 
business associations, business service providers, and financial sector service providers. 
Interventions focusing on asset creation should include a clear plan for long-term user-funded 
maintenance and management of the assets. Interventions without a strong likelihood of being 
profitable and sustainable after the life of activity in the absence of further donor support should 
not be included in applications. 


3.6. GRANT PROGRAM 

This activity will include a significant portion for sub-awards with growth pole actors designated 
to implement shared-value results fully aligned with the expected results. Our aspiration is 50% 
of the total award, as it will forward local capacity development goals. Several partnerships 
underway will be shared, discussed with the apparently successful applicant to inform budget 
fine-tuning during negotiations in the pre-award stage, and may include public-private 
partnerships that USAID has developed under a global development alliance framework. 

Illustrative grant or sub-award activities include innovative financing or catalytic investments, 
such as revolving funds to provide access to credit or inputs, first-loss catalytic capital to de-risk a 
partnership and attract additional financing, capital expenditures (equipment) up-front, strategic 
investments when these will generate leverage and impact, among others. The preference is to 
structure these as pay for results agreements, grants or contracts, and to design them to be aligned 
with the Agency’s PSE Policy and toolbox, such as Global Development Alliance guidelines. 

An anticipated purpose of working with and through private sector actors in Malawi is to ensure 
long-term sustainability after the close of the activity, grants and partnerships with commercial 
entities is anticipated. 

Construction activities are not allowed under grants. The definition of construction is available 
here: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maw. The Recipient must not award grants to 
host country government entities including, but not limited to, public universities, district, and 
regional offices and/or national Ministries. All grants must be completed six months prior to the 
end of the project. 

4 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING 

4.1 MONITORING 

The activity will take a robust adaptive management and learning approach, and carry out 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) jointly with key stakeholders, including the private 
sector. The Recipient must conduct the MEL system based on rigorous data collection, timely 
reporting, and adaptive management. The Recipient must also report on a variety of indicators 
and targets agreed to in the agreement and through the work planning process. The performance 
of the activity will be measured through performance monitoring by the Recipient and USAID. 

The Recipient will collect data to monitor activity output and outcome indicators. These 
indicators will track the number of beneficiaries and systems impacted by the activity in various 
categories. The indicators must be in line with the USAID agency standard indicators where 
possible and may include appropriate custom and context indicators as well. These indicators will 
be used for monitoring and evaluation purposes in addition to USAID internal reporting. All 
indicators will be disaggregated appropriately to provide necessary details for proper analysis. All 
training data will be disaggregated by age, gender, type of training, geographic location, disability 
where possible and appropriate, and any other categories required by USAID. While many output 


indicators will be tracked on a regular basis as components and tasks are achieved over the life of 
the activity, other indicators refer to one-time events or achievements that will be properly 
documented and reported. All data and results collected by the Recipient will be shared with 
USAID and conform to all USAID policies such as expected quality standards. 

The key outcomes expected for this activity have been defined in the Expected Results sections. 
The activity’s MEL plan will be expected to utilize rapid feedback mechanisms (see below) that 
are cost-effective and efficient (digital), build on existing questionnaires, processes and/or 
methodologies, and choose indicators that best align with USAID’s CDCS indicators, the GFSS 
framework, Climate Change and PSE indicators, with international and private sector priorities 
(e.g. Sustainable Development Goals - SDGs, compliance related, Fair Trade, Climate, etc.), as 
well as Malawi’s priorities (job growth, resilience). It will also be expected to analyze GOM 
guiding documents such as the NAIP/NAP43, NAMIS44, and Malawi 2063 First 10-year 
Implementation Plan) to propose alignment between the activity’s indicators and GOM. 

43 National Agriculture Investment Plan/National Agriculture Plan 

44 National Agriculture Management Information System 

The activity will be expected to utilize or develop a collaborative approach with the Rapid 
Feedback Monitoring System (RFMS) – see Attachment B, utilizing indicators at beneficiary 
level, to enable comparison to district and national level, to better understand how this strategy 
impacts resilience and livelihood indicators, and that this activity will contribute to 
USAID/Malawi’s learning agenda. The activity will be expected to develop a MEL plan, 
including indicators and specific targets that incorporate private sector MEL strategies and 
indicators. 

Illustrative indicators have been developed as examples and are found in Annex 7. The final set of 
indicators will be determined collaboratively during collaborative annual work planning sessions, 
where need be. 

4.2 USE OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (GIS) 

USAID/Malawi is operating a Mission-wide Management Information System (MIS) to support 
informed decision-making regarding programming and resource allocations across the portfolio. 

USAID will provide the training necessary to use the MIS. The Recipient is required to adhere to 
standards of data format, substance, and management; to submit all reportable activity data into 
the MIS; and to collect and submit Global Positioning System (GPS) data. The Recipient must 
provide electronic primary data sets to the USAID/Malawi AOR. All locations where 
implementation is occurring must be geo-referenced (communities, TAs, growth poles, hotels, 
districts, etc.). In particular, shape files of growth poles must be developed, and can be based on 
Malawi’s enumeration areas (EAs). USAID/Malawi is working to build out a GIS system that can 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006be used forcollaboration and integration at district level and around geographies, using standard 
format45. 

4.3EVALUATION 
In-line with USAID’s Evaluation Policy, USAIDmay procure third-party evaluations for theactivity to assess projectperformanceand/or project results. The evaluation methodology may 
employ comparison groups and quasi-experimental methods to evaluate project results. In such acase, USAID/Malawi will implement these third-party evaluations through an independentprocurement mechanism; however, theRecipientmust coordinate closelywith the third-party 
evaluator regarding dataand observation needs and must budget for all other program-relatedmonitoring, evaluation and learning expenses. TheRecipient must also design and implementeffective data management systems that facilitate third-party evaluations and that lay a foundation 
for USAIDand other parties to track the activity’s outcomes that extend beyond the life of theactivity.

4.4COLLABORATING, LEARNING AND ADAPTING (CLA)
The Recipientmust develop a formal CLA Plan which incorporates best practices in the industry 
while also allowing flexibility for new, innovative methods of capturing, analyzing, and sharing 
evidenceand experiences. The CLA Plan must clearly relate to the Activity Monitoring 
Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP), while incorporating activities to complement continuousperformance monitoring and external evaluation. The CLA Plan must propose learning strategies, 
processes, and time frames to ensure iterative reflection on new learning, emergent contextualshifts, game-changing trends, and adaptation of interventions and approach accordingly over theentire life of theactivity.Applicants should plan to incorporate data from the Mission’s planned 
high-frequency datacollection initiative (including co-financing that initiative as appropriate toensure adequatecoverage in intervention target areas) to facilitate rapid learning and adaptation.

USAID/Malawi hasa set of learning questions we will be exploring, related to this Activity:

●Is theGrowth Pole development hypothesis sound?
○Can shared value partnerships mobilize investments and expand inclusive, 
sustainable, and resilientwealth creation? 
○Can they create economies of scale, impact enabling policies based on shared dataand evidence?
○and expand the economic actors? 
○Did the growth poles approach reach smallholders, women, and youth, and if so, 
how and if now why not?
○Did the growth poles approach improve soil health, natural resource managementand watershed restoration and if so how and why, or why not?
45The Mission will at minimum, follow the Agency’s Technical Guidance on Geospatial Metadata Standards thatstates when creating geographic formats, Partners must utilize ISO Standard19139 –see Attachment D. Anotherreference isUSAID’s Geographic Data Collection and Submission Standards.


○ What was the growth poles impact on resilience, especially at systems level 
(transformation in seed systems, climate mitigation and adaptation, resilience to 
shocks and stresses)? 


● Where are they most successful and least successful and why? 
○ Are there differences in outcomes between growth pole sectors or size of anchor 
company and/or number of companies or other stakeholders involved? 



● Were substantial spillover, knock-on, secondary effects, and benefits created by the 
activity? 
○ What were they and how best to define these effects and benefits? 
○ What methodologies were learned on how to measure these effects and benefits? 
○ Were any of them negative and/or unintended? 





How did these compare within and outside a growth pole? 

● What were the mutual benefits of strategic DO integration with respect to DO-1 
interventions support (e.g., the enabling environment, local governance engagement, 
improved government services) and DO-2 youth-oriented interventions? 
● What are key lessons learned about the potential to scale up a growth pole approach? 
● Are Growth Poles a sustainable, cost-effective, and impactful investment? 


 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID/Malawi intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID 
anticipates one award at an estimated total amount of $39,780,462.00 over 5 years as stipulated 
below. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five years. The start date will be dependent upon the 
timeline in which discussions with the applicant(s) and necessary responsibility determinations 
have been completed. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

In accordance with ADS 303.3.21 and 2 CFR 700.16, USAID/Malawi will be substantially 
involved in the administration of the cooperative agreement to help the recipient achieve the 
agreement objectives. Unless modified by the Agreement Officer, substantial involvement during 
the implementation of this Agreement shall include the following: 

 

(a) Approval of Annual Work Plans and any associated changes. 


 

(b) Agency and recipient collaboration or joint participation. The recipient must collaborate 
with USAID/Malawi in conducting progress review meetings with key stakeholders and 
the following key areas: 
i. Partnerships with Private sector entities: USAID requires engagement in the 
process of selecting potential partnerships with private sector actors including 
definition of the criteria to be used for selecting private sector partners, and the due 
diligence requirements ESG analysis and process that the implementing partner 
will undertake during the selection process. The Recipient should engage with 
USAID from early identification of a potential partnership onward. USAID should 
review proposed companies, including the due diligence carried out with any 
significant (co-investing) new partnerships.46 
ii. Approval of Grant/Sub-Award Manual 
iii. Approval of Partnership Manual (or guiding framework for private sector 
partnership development including ESG and due diligence/risks analysis on 
potential partners, as applicable); and 
iv. Progress review meetings with key stakeholders. 


46 The due diligence principles will be collaboratively discussed with the Recipient, guided by 
USAID GDA guidelines as well as other international standards such as Responsible Agriculture 
Investment (RAI), UNCTAD’s Principles of Responsible Agricultural Investment (PRAI), 
Agriculture Labor Practices (ALP), etc. 

 


(c) Sub-award approval: ADS 303.3.21 requires the Recipient to obtain the Agreement 
Officer’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting out of any work under 
an award. 


 

(d) Approval of the recipient's Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan and any associated 
changes. 


 

(e) Monitor project implementation and where necessary authorize specified kinds of 
direction or redirection because of interrelationships with other projects as described in the 
Program Description. 


 

(f) Agency Authority to immediately halt a construction activity (where applicable). The 
Agreement Officer may immediately halt a construction activity if identified 
specifications are not met. 


 

(g) Approval of branding and marking plans in accordance with 2 CFR 700.16. 


 

(h) Approval of Specified Key Personnel. 


 

Applicants must propose names for qualified staff to be in the activity leadership positions 
designated as key to successful implementation of the activity objectives. The proposed staff shall 
be subject to approval by the USAID Agreement Officer. 

 

4. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for procurement of commodities and services under the award is 935, (Any 
area or country including the recipient country, but excluding any country that is a prohibited 
source). 

 

5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Growth Poles 
Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for 
ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration 
of the award through application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume 
responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, 
program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 


 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Applicant Eligibility 


 

Eligibility for this RFA is unrestricted. Applications from organizations that have not 
previously received financial assistance from USAID are welcome if the Applicant determines 
that it has the necessary capacity to implement activities of the magnitude such as this one. 

 

U.S., international, regional, or local organizations may consider applying, and U.S., international 
or regional applicants may also consider partnering with local organizations, including private 
sector, as sub awardees for activity implementation. To be considered a local organization, an 
entity MUST meet the following criteria: 

 

USAID defines a “local entity” as an individual, a corporation, a nonprofit organization, or 
another body of persons that: 

 

(1) Is legally organized under the laws of; and 

 

(2) Has as its principal place of business or operations in; and 

 

(3) Is majority owned by individuals who are citizens or lawful permanent residents of; and 

 

(4) Is managed by a governing body the majority of who are citizens or lawful permanent 
residents of the country receiving assistance. 

 

For purposes of this section, ‘majority owned’ and ‘managed by’ include, without limitation, 
beneficiary interests and the power, either directly or indirectly, whether exercised or exercisable, 
to control the election, appointment, or tenure of the organization's managers or most of the 
organization's governing body by any means. 

 

These eligibility requirements apply to any local sub-awardee that is engaged during activity 
implementation. Applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID are most welcome. 

 

 

Applicants MUST provide as part of the application package information and supporting 
documents that prove that the proposed prime or sub-awardee local organization satisfies 
the qualifications of a local organization in view of the applicable USAID definition for local 
organization provided above. 

 



 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

There is no cost sharing requirement under this RFA. However, the applicant is at liberty to 
consider and propose any cost share level it can chose to contribute for activity implementation 
over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis of 


calculation in the budget narrative. If the applicant chooses to provide cost share, it must also 
provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations 
involved in implementing the resulting award. 

 

Note must be taken that cost share, if proposed, is not part of the merit review factors. As such 
any voluntary proposal to bring cost share will not result in added ratings or scores during 
technical or cost review. Proposed cost share funds may be provided directly by the recipient, 
other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors, host governments, local organizations, 
communities, and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of 
activities at the country level. This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or 
other facilities or equipment which may be used for the program provided by the recipient. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and cooperative agreements see 2 CFR 200.306. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 


 

SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Points of Contact (POC) 


 

Primary POC: 

 

Name 

Lazarus Chimangeni 

Title 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

E-mail 

lchimangeni@usaid.gov 



 

Secondary POC: 

 

Name 

Gideon Suya 

Title 

Senior Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

E-mail 

gsuya@usaid.gov 



 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this RFA must be submitted in writing through e-mail to oaa-malawi-
solicit@usaid.gov with a copy to lchimangeni@usaid.gov and gsuya@usaid.gov no later than the 
date and time indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. No telephone contacts will be 
accommodated. Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this RFA will be 
furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants, if that information is necessary in 
submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective 
Applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Applications must be submitted in two separate parts: 

 

(1) Technical Application and 


 

(2) Cost/Business Application. 


 



 

4. Application Submission Procedures: 


 

Applications in response to this RFA must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor 
considered. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated 
documentation of delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified 
mail receipt. 

 

 

 


5. Technical Application Format 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of the RFA. Each Applicant 
must furnish all information required in this RFA. 

 

It is the Applicants’ responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and 
received on time. The submission must be sent electronically to the contacts provided on the 
cover letter of the RFA by the date stated in the letter of invitation to apply and must comply with 
the specific requirements of the RFA. Each Applicant is responsible for all costs related to the 
preparation and submission of the application. 

 

Applicants are required to follow the instructions provided in this section and below. If a 
submission is sent by multiple emails, please indicate in the subject line of the email whether the 
email relates to the Technical or Cost application, and the desired sequence of multiple emails (if 
more than one is sent) and of attachments (e.g., "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost 
application is being sent in two emails, the first email must have a subject line which says: 
"[organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

The scale of significance for the evaluation factors is provided to guide the applicant in 
preparation of its application and provide an advance hint of the importance and emphasis which 
must be made to inform the review and award consideration and other related decisions. 

 

I. Technical Approach – Most important, equal to 60% 
II. Key Personnel and Management Structure – Second most important, equal to 25% 
III. Collaborative Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and Collaboration (CLA) – Third 
most important, equal to 15% 


6. Instructions for the Preparation of the Technical Application: 

 

All text must be in Times New Roman 12-point font, with a minimum of 1-inch margins on all 
sides. The Technical Application must be submitted in pdf format and in unlocked MS Word 
format. Tables, graphs, and charts may use smaller font, but not less than 8-point may be used for 
any text. All documentation must be written in English, and the pages must be numbered, 
including numbered Annexes (e.g., Annex 1). Technical applications must strictly follow the 
format prescribed below. 

 

(i) Main Body: 


 

The main body of the technical application must include the following sections: 

 

1) Cover page 

2) Table of Contents 

3) Acronym List 

4) Executive Summary 

5) Technical Approach 

6) Key Personnel and Management Structure 


7) Collaborative Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and Collaboration (CLA) 

8) Annexes 

 

 

 

1) Cover Page 


 

This is a single page that includes: the Program title, the Request for Applications number, name 
and UEI number of prime applicant organization, names of any proposed sub-awardee 
organizations (and their UEI numbers), the organization’s contact person, including his/her title a 
telephone number, mailing address, email address. Also state whether the contact person is the 
person with authority to enter into contractual agreements for the organization, and if not, that 
person should also be listed. The cover page must be signed by these individuals. 

 

2) Table of Contents 


 

This section is limited to two pages and must at a minimum include the page numbers for the 
main sections of the technical application. The specific headings for each of the annexes must be 
listed. 

 

3) Acronym List 


 

This section is limited to two pages and must spell out any acronyms that are utilized in the 
technical application. A table format is acceptable. 

 

4) Executive Summary 


 

A two-page maximum brief description of the proposed activities, goals, purposes, and 
anticipated results, technical and managerial resources of the applicant, and how the overall 
activity will be managed. This should give the reader of the application a “snapshot” of what is 
contained in the application. 

 

5) Criterion 1: Technical Approach 


 

The technical application must address the program description provided in the RFA. The 
applications must demonstrate the applicant’s capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving 
the strategic and program objectives of the program. 

 

Technical applications must be specific, complete, and concise. The application must outline how 
the Applicant will achieve the activity’s expected results. It must cover the following sections: 

 

 

Instructions to Applicants: 

 

Applicants must demonstrate that their proposed technical approach is likely to achieve the 
program goal and results associated with the activity component areas as articulated in the 
program description. The technical approach must therefore: 

 




• Provide a clear, coherent, and achievable growth poles strategy working with and through 
private sector actors, partnering process and criteria, and the role of the activity actors 
(and USAID) clearly articulated. 
• Provide clarity of the activity’s strategy to strengthen systems resilience through 
improved climate and natural resource management. 
• Clarify the activity’s strategy to expand inclusive development including an articulation 
of how smallholders, Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), youth and 
women will be reached, and their incomes, assets and resilience improved. 
• Present a well-articulated, achievable Strategy to mobilize innovative, impact-oriented 
credit and finance. 
• Clarify sustainability of the proposed approach, e.g., its ability to catalyze interventions 
and impact that will continue after the activity has ended. 
• Demonstrate the ability to work with key stakeholders (e.g., private sector firms, 
smallholder farmers, MSMEs, government, NGO sector, CBOs, civil society, donors, and 
informal groups and networks) 
• Clearly provide a summary of institutional capabilities and technical strengths, including 
unique or specialty areas of technical expertise in working with private sector firms of all 
sizes, other participates in commodity value chains, market systems actors, and those 
affected by the food security and resilience at the household level. This must be extended 
to those of all proposed sub-recipients. 
• Sufficiently demonstrate relevant technical and managerial expertise to implement this 
type of Activity in developing countries. 


 

6) Criterion 2: Key Personnel and Management Structure 

Instructions to Applicants: 

 

Applicants must describe a management approach that includes staffing/recruitment, minimizes 
management costs, and reserves the highest possible level of funding for implementing this 
Activity. The approach must also propose a rational staffing mix, including key and non-key 
personnel and short-term technical assistance, which creatively optimizes the use of resources. 
Applicants must show how they will access high quality, relevant technical expertise and how it 
will build local capacity and optimize effectiveness. Management personnel must have 
experience leading private sector, resilience, and natural resource management-oriented 
programs of similar size and complexity in developing countries. Technical specialists proposed 
as key personnel must have the necessary expertise in the subject areas for which they are 
proposed. A required attribute for all key personnel must include strong management, 
interpersonal, communication and facilitation skills, and the ability to work closely and 
coherently as a team. In line with efforts to maximize localization, USAID strongly encourages 
that Applicants consider and recruit local, Malawian talent to the maximum extent practicable. 
Applicants should do their due diligence in hiring local talent and expertise. The applicant must 
propose: 

 




a) Key Personnel 

A team of 3-5 key personnel with defined positions based on the technical approach. The 
proposed key personnel must have relevant qualifications as well as experience and must meet 
the following pooled criteria: 

• Minimum 3 years’ experience in mentoring, coaching and skills transfer in area of 
expertise. 
• Minimum 8 years’ experience providing expertise and/or leadership to large, complex 
programs and projects in international settings, preferably working with USG, other 
major donor and/or large international institutions 
• Demonstrated team player with visionary leadership, positive attitude, creative thinking, 
professionalism, strong interpersonal skills, and demonstration of professional 
accomplishments. 
• Excellent representational and communication skills, both written and oral proficiency in 
English. 
• Excellent managerial and operational experience. 
• Demonstrated experience integrating gender and/or youth programming into 
interventions. 
• Master’s degree in a related field. 


Specific Requirements for Individual Key Personnel must be as follows: 

Chief of Party: The Chief of Party (COP) shall provide overall strategic leadership and 
oversight to the activity. S/he shall have depth and breadth of technical expertise and experience, 
a solid professional reputation, interpersonal skills, and professional relationships to fulfill the 
requirements of the activity description. The Chief of Party must have significant experience 
managing large and complex activities and demonstrated experience working with and through 
the private sector. The COP must have the following: 

• A Masters’ degree or higher in a related field. 
• Minimum of 15 years of experience in international development, including experience 
related to agriculture value chain competitiveness, agribusiness management, and private 
sector development. 
• At least 5 years’ experience as a Chief of Party or similar senior level, managing large 
and complex donor-funded or USG activities of this size and scope (in terms of dollar 
amount and number of people managed), in developing countries and preferably in the 
Southern or Eastern African region. 
• Excellent managerial and operational experience, preferably in managing large donor 
projects involving coordination with multiple implementing partners or institutions in the 
Southern and Eastern African region, and sub-recipient / complex partnering 
relationships. 





• Minimum 8 years’ experience in developing activity work-plans, budgets, managing 
implementation, staff, and short-term technical assistance, preferably working with USG 
and/or other large donor funded projects. 
• Demonstrated skills on problem solving, collaboration, creativity, and willingness to 
innovate, management skills and history of productive involvement with a wide range 
and levels of organizations (government, private sector, NGOs, research institutions). 


 

Deputy Chief of Party; The Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) shall provide support to the COP 
with strategic leadership and oversight to the activity. S/he shall have depth and breadth of 
technical expertise and experience, a solid professional reputation, interpersonal skills, and 
professional relationships to fulfill the requirements of the activity description, and close 
working relationships with key stakeholders in Malawi. The DCOP must have experience 
managing large, complex activities and demonstrated experience working with and through the 
private sector. The DCOP minimum requirements must be the following: 

• At least 10 years’ experience managing large and complex activities, preferably in the 
Southern or Eastern African region and preferably experience with market-led 
agricultural, resilience and/or natural resource programming. 
• Must demonstrate commitment to market-led, private sector engagement approaches. 
• Excellent managerial and operational experience, preferably in managing large donor 
projects involving coordination with multiple implementing partners or institutions in 
Malawi or the region, and sub-recipient / complex partnering relationships, preferably in 
Malawi. 
• Minimum 3 years’ experience managing USG and/or other major donor-funded projects 
with a focus on knowledge and expertise in financial rules, regulations, and oversight at a 
senior level. 
• Minimum 5 years’ experience in developing activity work-plans, budgets, managing 
implementation, staff, and short-term technical assistance. 


Private Sector Partnership Manager (the title of this person can be altered, but the function of 
this person is a Key Personnel). The requirements for this position must be the following: 

 

• At least 10 years managing private sector relationships, developing long-term, co-
financing partnership arrangements with companies and/ or working for private sector, 
managing donor, NGO and/or GOM relationships from the Private sector perspectives 
• At least 2 references from private sector companies with whom s/he has worked 
• Demonstrated ability to provide technical leadership for activities that cover production, 
processing, and marketing of agricultural products, including value-added manufactured 
products. 


 

 




Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Lead; The minimum requirements are: 

• At least 8 years managing complex monitoring, evaluation and learning teams and/or 
projects. 
• Must have at least five years’ experience implementing both qualitative and quantitative 
data collection approaches and methodologies. 
• Must provide links to at least two examples that may include any of the following: 1) a 
research methodology design, qualitative and quantitative that s/he developed or led; 2) 
at least one technical report that s/he has written or led; 3) examples of at least two 
performance indicator definitions of outcome and output (indicator level); 3) example of 
a MEL plan s/he has written or led; and 4) executive public report or success story (for 
public consumption, non-technical language) from a project s/he has led. 
• Proven skills in integrating private sector, gender and/or youth considerations in 
activities; and reporting on the outcomes. 
• Minimum 5 years’ experience in developing activity work-plans, budgets, managing 
implementation, staff, and short-term technical assistance. 


 

 

 

NOTE: Resumes with reference contacts or additional information for the proposed 
key personnel must be provided as annexes to the application. 

 



 

b) Management Structure: 

Applicants must outline the management and staffing plan for the successful implementation of 
the program and determine the proper number and mix of personnel, short-term technical 
assistance, and other staffing arrangements necessary to cost-effectively carry out the objectives 
of this activity. The management and staffing plan must fulfill the following functions: 

• A detailed staffing plan for overall managerial and administrative functions. 
• A staffing plan and its annexes that clearly show how the proposed staffing mix, 
including sub-awards is appropriate for achieving the program’s objectives and 
supporting the implementation at all levels. 
• A clear organogram summarizing the staffing plan and any key partnerships. sub-awards 
attached as an annex showing the totality of positions proposed for all components of the 
plan, inter-staff relationships and lines of communications. 
• A clear outline of the staffing mix which fulfills the following functions (at a minimum), 
project management, financial management, technical leadership, and knowledge 
management. 
• Clear description on how the proposed staffing will enable the project to easily 
complement, communicate and understand their private sector, government, and civil 
society counterparts. 
• Clear discussion on how successful they have been in working with the private sector as 
well as the government. 





7) Criterion 3: Collaborative Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and Collaboration 
(CLA) 

Instructions to Applicants 

The Applicants must present a CLA Plan which incorporates best practices in the industry while 
also allowing flexibility for new, innovative methods of capturing, analyzing, and sharing 
evidence and experiences. The CLA Plan must clearly relate to the Activity Monitoring 
Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP), while incorporating activities to complement 
continuous performance monitoring and external evaluation. 

The CLA Plan must propose learning strategies, processes, and time frames to ensure iterative 
reflection on new learning, emergent contextual shifts, game-changing trends, and adaptation of 
interventions and approach accordingly over the entire life of the activity. The Applicants should 
define how they will incorporate data from the Mission’s planned high-frequency data collection 
initiative (including co-financing that initiative as appropriate to ensure adequate coverage in 
intervention target areas) to facilitate rapid learning and adaptation. 

 

ORAL PRESENTATIONS: 

As a result of the technical review of the applications, USAID/Malawi may select a single 
successful apparent winner among the Applicants and continue directly to award 
negotiations; or USAID/Malawi may request that one to multiple Applicants supplement 
their written applications with oral presentations, specifically on the proposed technical 
approach and/or respond to questions. The oral presentations will aim to give the selected 
Applicants a chance to articulate and demonstrate how the proposed technical 
approaches represent sound, dynamic and flexible responsiveness to the context outlined 
in the activity description. 

In case of oral presentations, the proposed key personnel must be available and play an 
active role in the process including making the presentation itself and/or providing 
clarifications on the proposed technical approach. It is the responsibility of the selected 
Applicants to ensure availability of all relevant individuals including proposed key 
personnel on the date for oral presentations. The Oral presentations are not expected to 
exceed two hours and shall be done on a virtual platform after the conclusion of the 
technical review of the written applications. 

The selected Applicants for the oral presentation phase will be notified of the presentation 
date and time after USAID completes review of the written applications and the 
Agreement Officer reaches a decision. The Agreement Officer will, in writing, notify the 
selected Applicants of their proceeding into the oral presentation phase and will provide 
each of them with the key issues (derived from the written application) that should be 
incorporated into the question-and-answers and/or presentation, as needed. 

Following the oral presentations, the selected single or multiple Applicant/s will be 
requested to submit a revised final application for further review, after which one 






successful apparent winner will be determined to have proposed the most technically 
strong application in the interest of the US Government and USAID/Malawi.. 



 



 

 

8) Annexes 

 

Annexes to the Technical Application may include: 

 

Annex A – Technical Approach Supporting Data, Graphs, Charts: This annex is optional, and 
may include any detailed graphs, maps, tables, and other related technical information that 
support Applicant’s technical approach. All supporting data must be clearly referenced in 
Technical Application and referred to in Annex A (e.g., See Annex A, Figure 1). 

 

Annex B – Draft Work Plan: must include a draft first year work plan. Table format is 
acceptable. 

 

Annex C – Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP): must include a draft 
five-year ME&L Plan clearly demonstrating short term, medium term, and long-term targets and 
how progress will be measured. Additionally, ME&L should highlight how learning will inform 
program implementation. 

 

Annex D – Organizational Chart: must include a pictorial organogram that demonstrates the 
organization of staff including reporting relationships and locations. 

 

Annex E – Key Personnel CVs: must include CVs for each proposed key personnel candidate. 

 

Annex F - Mobilization Plan: must include a 90 day activity start up plan to include the annual 
work plan. 

 

Annex G - Past Performance: must include past performance specifically related to this RFA. 

 

Annex H - Draft Environmental Mitigation Plan: must be included in the application. 

 

 

7. Instructions for the Preparation of the cost application 

 

Note: Applicants may refer to a training module recently developed by USAID on how to develop 
accurate and comprehensive cost applications (includes a budget template example) in response to 
USAID notice of funding opportunities here: 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/get-grant-or-contract/trainings-how-work-usaid/preparing-
budgets-assistance-awards 

 

The business (cost) application must be submitted separately from the technical application. 
While no page limit exists for the cost application, the applicant is encouraged to be as concise as 


possible while still providing all the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

The cost application or budget must be submitted in US Dollars (USD). Prior to award, applicants 
may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the Agreement Officer 
to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. 

 

The cost application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

(a) Cover Page 








 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter for the cost application that will serve as a 
transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. 

 

The cost application must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later 
versions) with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Cost application with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to make award and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The cost application 
must have sheets covering the 5-year performance period and additional sheets as necessary to 
provide cost details or category breakdown. 



 

(b) SF 424 Form(s): 








 

Applicants must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following link: 

 

Instructions for SF-424 

 

 

 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

 

Application for Federal 
Assistance (SF-424) 

Instructions for SF-424A 

Budget Information (SF-424A) 

Instructions for SF-424B 

Assurances (SF-424B) 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

C) Required Certifications and Assurances: 


 

The Apparent Successful Applicant will be required to complete the following documents and 
submit signed copies upon request from the Agreement Officer. 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” document found at https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mav 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 


 

D) Budget and Budget Narrative: 



 

The Budget must be submitted in US Dollars (USD) as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 
2000 or later versions) with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project 
year, including itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount as applicable. 
Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells 
lengthen the cost analysis time required to make award and may result in a rejection of the cost 
application. 

 

The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed 
costs. Applicants must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in 
the budget, such as Branding and Marking and environmental compliance and impact mitigation. 
The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s 
determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

At a minimum, the budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by Applicants and any 
potential Sub-Applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template. 


 

● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 


 

● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

E) Detailed Budget Categories: 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances: – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. Applicant’s budget must include position title, salary 
rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits: – Applicants must propose a rate and explain how the applicant 
determined the rate. The Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised 
of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, 
expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Allowances: If proposed, allowances must be broken down by specific type and by 
position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The Budget 
Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the services 
rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of the 
applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on personnel 



compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of 
compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale 
used and supporting market research. 


 

4) Travel and Transportation: Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an 
attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. 


 

5) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real 
Property: Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies 
and the cost per unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of 
the equipment and supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must 
support the necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness considering such factors as: 
rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives 
available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

6) Subawards: Specify the budget for the portion of the activity to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity 
is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same 
requirements as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

7) Other Direct Costs: This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams, and inoculations, as well as 
any other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the activity proposed by the 
Applicant. The Applicant must indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed 
conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along 
with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs: Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. To better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200. The application must identify which approach the Applicants are requesting and 
provide the applicable supporting information. Below are the most used Indirect Cost 
Rate methods: 


 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved 
NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency 
other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, 
at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

and finalization. See USAID’sIndirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizationsfor 
further guidance.

Method 3 -De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC)
Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have acurrent NICRAInitial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged aseither indirect ordirect costs but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. Ifchosen, thismethodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federalawards until such time asa non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federalentity mayapply to do at any time. The applicant mustdescribe which cost elements it charges indirectlyvs. directly. See 2 CFR200 for further information. 

Method 4 -Indirect Costs Charged as AFixed AmountEligibility: Non-U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval isat the discretion of the AOInitial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet thatincludes the following:

●Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal yearand estimates for thecurrent year.
●Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salariesand expensesof executive officers, personneladministration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than oneprogram or activity, such as depreciation, rentalcosts, operations and maintenance offacilities, and telephoneexpenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the currentyear
●Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across allprograms and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of thatcostto eachprogram or activity to which the cost applies.
If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% deminimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may requestadditionalsupporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still beunder consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve theapplicant’s requested method. 

9)Program Income:If theRecipient is a non-profitorganization, any program incomegenerated under the award will be added to USAID funding (and any cost-sharing that may 
be provided, if applicable), and used for program purposes.
10)Cost Sharing: There is no cost share requirementunder thisRFA. However, Applicants areat liberty to consider and propose any cost share levelthat the organization can choose to 
contribute for activity implementation over the life of the agreement and specify the sourcesof such resources,and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. If an Applicantchooses to provide cost share, it must also provide a breakdown of thecost share (financialand in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the resulting award 
and how that cost sharewill be used and accounted for.

 

F) Prior approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407: 


 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the Applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
Applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

G) Approval of Subawards: 


 

Applicants must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time 
of award. For each proposed sub-award, Applicants must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization. 
● UEI Number. 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list. 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM). 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list. 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred. 
● Confirmation that applicants have completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b). 
● Any negative findings from the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for mitigation. 


 

H) Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) Number and System for Award Management (SAM) 
Requirements: 


 

USAID may not award to an Applicant unless the Applicant has complied with all applicable UEI 
number and SAM requirements. Each Applicant (unless the Applicant is an individual or 
Federal awarding agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or 
has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required 
to: 

 

1. Provide a valid UEI number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-recipients. 


 

2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov). 


 

3. Always maintain an active SAM registration with current information during which it has 
an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a federal 
awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take a few weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an Applicant has not fully complied with the 


requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. Applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

I) History of Performance 


 

The apparently successful applicant will be required to provide information regarding its recent 
and relevant history of performance for all its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or 
cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, not to exceed three awards, as 
follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization. 

• Award Number. 

• Activity Title. 

• A brief description of the activity. 

• Period of Performance. 

• Award Amount. 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three years and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work 
at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact 
information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the apparently successful applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it 
may provide a short explanation and the corrective action taken. The successful applicant should 
not provide general information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant 
information concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider 
such information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional 
information and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk 
assessment. 

 

J) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan: 


 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award. 

 

BRANDING STRATEGY – ASSISTANCE (JUNE 2012) 

 

1) Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
"Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and 
positioned, and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host 
country citizens. 



 

2) The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

3) Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

4) Applicants must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision 
and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement, or other assistance instrument. 


 

5) The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, each of the following: 


 

(i) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 


 

(ii) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 


 

(iii) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID 
logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the 
USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or 
RFA states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(iv) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or with) 
the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when 
acknowledging contributions. 
(v) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(vi) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 
(vii) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. 
(viii) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(ix) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 


 

1) Describe the main program message. 
2) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
3) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and 
so forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, 



“USAID is from the American People.” 
4) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 


 

(x) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 


 

(xi) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials 
and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly 
acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 


 

(a) The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information 
is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 
applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

(b) If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 


 

MARKING PLAN – ASSISTANCE (JUNE 2012) 

 

1. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other 
items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and 
brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official 
marking for the Agency and is found on the USAID Web site at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the RFA or RFA will state if an Administrator 
approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 








 

2. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 








 

3. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 








 

4. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the 
budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with 
the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement, or other assistance instrument. 








 

5. The Marking Plan must include each of the following: 








 


A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce, and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 

 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature. 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by 
USAID. 
(iii)Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or 
disaster relief programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the 
USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise 
acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 


 

A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID 
Identity. 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables. 
(iii)When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 
and where the applicant will place the marking. 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 


 

Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of why 
the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking 
requirements would: 

 

i. Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 
goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 







ii. Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must explain why 
each deliverable must be seen as credible. 
iii. Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each item or 
product is better positioned as host-country government item or product. 
iv. Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item or 
commodity would impair its functionality. 
v. Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would 
not be cost beneficial or practical. 
vi. Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must 
identify the relevant norm and explain why marking would violate that norm or otherwise 
be inappropriate. 
vii. Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international 
law violated by the marking. 






 

6. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure 
the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 








 

7. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in, and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 








 

K) Funding Restrictions: 


 

(1) Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 
for assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 


 

(2) USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 


 

(3) Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the Agreement Officer, all 
commodities and services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be 
from the authorized geographic code specified in Section B of this RFA and must meet the 
source and nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 


 

L) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 


 

(a) Personal Conflict of Interest: 

 


(1) An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or 
an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 




 

(2) The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the Applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after 
submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the 
Agreement officer no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 




 

(b) Organizational Conflict of Interest: 


 

The Applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include, but are not 
limited to, situations in which an Applicant or the Applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding 
opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the Applicant. 

 

(c) Covered Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Equipment or Services 

 

Pursuant to ADS 303.3.35.2, in preparation of the Cost application, the Applicant must 
understand that effective August 13, 2020, a recipient may not procure covered 
telecommunication equipment or services for the implementation of their program using award 
funds. 

 

2 CFR 200.216, applicable to US organizations, and the standard provision “Prohibition on 
Certain Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment” applicable to non-
US NGOs, implement Section 889(b) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act 
(NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2019 (Pub. L. 115-232) that prohibits the use of award funds, including 
direct and indirect costs, cost share and program income, to procure covered telecommunication 
and video surveillance services or equipment. The statute covers certain telecommunications 
equipment and services produced or provided by Huawei Technologies Company or ZTE 
Corporation, Hytera Communications Corporation, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology 
Company, or Dahua Technology Company (or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities). 

 

Unless otherwise authorized in a special award requirement or standard provision in the award, 
such covered telecommunication equipment or services are unallowable costs as specified in 2 
CFR 200.471. As such, the recipient must not use any award funds for such costs, including direct 
or indirect costs, cost share, or program income generated under the award for covered 
telecommunications equipment or services as specified in 2 CFR 200.216. The Section 889 
prohibitions do not apply to awards made prior to August 13, 2020. 

[END OF SECTION D] 


 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

1. Merit Review Criteria 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here is tailored to the requirements of this RFA. Applicants 
must note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which Applicants must 
address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all applications will be 
reviewed. 

 

Technical and other factors will be reviewed relative to each other, as described here, and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be assessed 
by a Merit Review Committee (MRC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Application Review and Selection Process: 


 

Merit Review Methodology 

The MRC will review the applications in accordance with the merit review criteria established in 
the RFA. The criteria provide for a selection based upon the criteria established before receipt of 
the applications and are intended to assess how well the applications respond to the technical 
parameters needed to achieve the objectives of the Growth Poles activity. 

 

Merit Review Criteria 

The MRC comprised of USAID technical staff will review the technical applications in 
accordance with the methods described below. The MRC will use an adjectival approach when 
reviewing the received applications based on stated criteria. 

 

When choosing an appropriate adjective, MRC members shall consider a variety of factors related 
to the sections of the application and relevant to its overall quality and technical soundness. These 
include: 

 

Scale of Significance for Merit Review Factors: 

The scale of significance for the review factors is provided to guide Applicants in preparation of 
its application and provide an advance hint of the importance and emphasis which must be made 
to inform the review and award consideration and other related decisions. 

 

1. Technical Approach – Most important, equal to 60% 
2. Key Personnel and Management Structure – Second most important, equal to 25% 
3. Collaborative Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and Collaboration (CLA) – Third 
most important, equal to 15% 


 

Technical factors are significantly more important than cost. However, the cost application must 
demonstrate realistic spread of resources aligned with the proposed technical approach for activity 
implementation. Overall, all three factors combined, must demonstrate a consolidated capability 
of the applicant to implement the activity and achieve the intended results. 



 


 

(1) Technical Approach: 




The technical approach will be reviewed based on its technical soundness especially as regards to 
programmatic responsiveness to the goal of the activity, including sustainability in achieving the 
activity objectives. 

 

(2) Key Personnel and Management Structure: 

This criterion will be assessed to determine the degree: 

 

• To which the proposed key personnel meet the requirements, are dynamic and 
demonstrate strong communication, technical, and managerial competencies for 
productive implementation of the activity. 
• To which the proposed management structure will achieve a cost-effective, impactful, 
agile management structure with clear staffing roles and responsibilities, including any 
partnering entities. 


 

(3) Collaborative Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and Collaboration (CLA) 

This criterion will be assessed based on the extent to which the proposed plan has a robust 
monitoring, collaborative and continual evaluation and learning approach that includes a strategy 
for adaptive management and is designed to work jointly with others to test the growth poles 
development hypothesis, including secondary/spillover results. 

 

Cost Application / Budget Review: 

 

USAID/Malawi will review the cost application of the Applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award from the merit review criteria to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

USAID/Malawi will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – to achieve the objectives of 
the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of 


the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award 
with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices: 


 

Award of an agreement or grant contemplated by this RFA cannot be made until funds have 
been appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While 
USAID anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential Applicants are 
hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements: 


 

The resulting award from this RFA will be administered in accordance with the following policies 
and regulations: 

 

Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations 

Standard Provisions for US Non-Governmental Organizations 

 

3. Reporting Requirements: 


 

3.1. FINANCIAL REPORTING: 




 

(A) Reporting of Expenditures: 


 

The Recipient shall submit quarterly financial reports using the SF 425 in keeping with 22 CFR 
226.52. Electronic submission is preferred. The SF 425 shall be submitted to the Agreement 
Officer Representative (AOR). 

 

(B) Specific Financial Reporting Requirements: 


 

The Recipient must provide USAID/Malawi with quarterly financial data including a summary of 
finances and a pipeline analysis of funds obligated, funds expended, expenses accrued and funds 
remaining by budget categories. The financial information should be broken-down by fund 
category and year of obligation. This report must be submitted by the 15th day of the final month 
of each quarter. 

 

(C) Reporting of Foreign Taxes: 


 

The Recipient shall comply with the requirements set forth in Standard Provision entitled 
“Reporting of Foreign Taxes.” 

 

3.2. PERFORMANCE REPORTING 




 

The Recipient shall adhere to all reporting requirements listed below. All reports as required 
under Substantial Involvement shall be submitted by the due date for approval of the USAID 
AOR (Agreement Officer Representative) designated by the Agreement Officer. The AOR can 
request Ad Hoc reports throughout the life of the activity and as needed but will endeavor to limit 
these requests when regular reporting can provide the same information. The Recipient will 
consult with the AOR on the format and expected content of reports prior to submission. 


 

(a) Annual Work Plans: 

 

The Recipient must submit draft Annual Work Plan no later than May 1st each year for 
AOR/USAID review, and final Annual Work Plan must be submitted no later than August 30th 
and must be approved no later than September 30th. In general, the work plans should be broken 
down by program or implementation focus areas or objectives and may include growth pole 
specific work plans, if relevant Work plans should include costed activities with accompanying 
budget narratives. 

 

(b) USAID Reporting: 

 

The partner must provide the following reports and plans to USAID for AOR approval. All 
written documentation (correspondence, reports, information sheets, etc.) for submission by the 
Recipient to USAID/Malawi must be in English unless otherwise requested. 

 

(c) Performance Progress Reports: 

 

The partner must provide Quarterly and Annual Activity Reports, and upon completion of the 
Activity a Final Report must be submitted according to the schedule identified in USAID 
Reporting and Deliverables Schedule. The reports from the Recipient must follow the format 
established by the AOR and must include, in addition to specific information required in writing 
by the AOR, a narrative that addresses: 

 

• Achievements and discussion of major activities broken down by either objective area and/or 
growth pole partnerships, where applicable. 
● Results against targets 
● Updates to Geospatial /activity location data 
• Problems encountered and proposed remedial actions. 
• Success stories; and 
• Lessons learned. 


 

The Recipient must provide success stories in a readable, visually compelling format that USAID 
can use for communicating success stories to diverse audiences with minimal revisions. The 
Annual Activity Report must report against all indicators established in the MELP. 

 

4. Program Income 


 

Program income is both allowable and in the case of growth poles models, expected, for 
recipients or subrecipients under this award. If any program income is generated during the 
performance period of the cooperative agreement, the Recipient shall account for it in accordance 
with the stipulations of Standard Provision. The generated program income shall be added to the 
activity. Additional guidance shall be provided by the Agreement Officer on case-to-case basis. 

 

5. Environmental Compliance and Management 


 

In accordance with 22 CFR 216, the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for activities being 
implemented by USAID/Malawi under the Growth Poles are covered in four IEEs namely: 


USAID REQUEST FORAPPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006

USAID/Malawi Private Sector Engagement Activities Development Objective 3 (July 2021- July 
2026)IEE. TheIEE is on the following link USAID/Malawi Private SectorEngagementActivities Development Objective-3 (July 2021 – July 2026) IEE

TheImplementing partner will develop an Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 
(EMMP) describing how the project will, in terms, implement those conditions in the IEE that 
apply to project activities, including monitoring to assure appropriate implementation andsufficiency of environmental compliance measures. This shall include training of staff and 
partners, where appropriate.

TheImplementing Partner shall integrate these environmental compliance measures into theproject work plan and reported on them in the normal basis of project reporting. USAID/MalawiSustainable Economic Growth (SEG)Team shall assure that this integration occurs. Thisreporting will be incorporated into pertinent Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Plans and 
annual work plans to be submitted to USAID/Malawi. The environmental monitoring report willbe submitted to the AOR by the end of each year.

[END OF SECTION F]


 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 

 

Questions regarding this RFA should be submitted electronically through e-mail to: oaa-malawi-
solicit@usaid.gov with a copy to lchimangeni@usaid.gov and gsuya@usaid.gov no later than the 
date and time indicated on the cover letter of this RFA or as amended. 

 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 


 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

(1) Funding Reservation: 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

(2) Applications with Proprietary Data: 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is 
made because of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will 
have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. 
This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this 
data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction 
are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of 
this application.” 

 

(3) Post Award Tax Guidance - Duty and Tax Exemption: 

 

When an organization receives USAID funding to operate in Malawi, it must register the activity 
with the Malawi Government to receive duty free privileges and tax exemption waivers and 
refunds. It is important to note that tax exemption is granted to the award (activity), and not the 
organization. 

 

Once an activity has been registered for duty free and tax exemption status, the following 
procedure should be followed to request duty free clearance of purchased commodities/goods: 
Note that waiver of duty free for commodities/goods is done up front. 

 

Once an activity has been registered for tax exemption with the Malawi Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) through the relevant line ministry, the activity implementing organization needs to apply to 
the Commissioner General for VAT exemption. The Malawi Revenue Authority (MRA) 
Commissioner General will grant an approval letter which will be taken to the USAID Desk 
Officers at the MRA. 

 

 


 

VAT Processing Roles and Responsibilities 

 

Role of the Implementing Partner / Grantee: 

 

(a) Partner makes payments for services/small purchases and goods. 
(b) Partner records all the payments net of VAT as an expense in their accounting records. 
(c) Partner prepares claim forms for submission to MRA (see Chapter 4). 
(d) Partner maintains a record of all taxes claimed for VAT reimbursement and waivers. 
(e) It is the responsibility of the partners to ensure that receipts are valid and meet the 
requirements of the MRA. 


 

Role of USAID/Malawi: 

 

(a) USAID AOR endorses the MRA forms and provides endorsement letters to USAID/ 
Executive Officer (EXO) for signature. 
(b) The USAID/EXO signs the cover letter as supporting documentation and returns the forms 
and letter to the Partner for submission to MRA. 
(c) USAID/OFM through the AOR provides guidance and serves as a point of contact, along 
with the AOR, to assist with technical VAT related matters. 


 

Role of MRA: 

 

(a) MRA reviews and makes payments, directly to the partner, when applicable. 
(b) MRA communicates any disallowances or required submission changes directly to the 
partner. 


 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 


 

ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

If requested to submit a full application, Applicants must submit a detailed cost application / 
budget using format outlined in standard form “SF-424A”. 

 

Summary Budget 

 

Cost Category 

Breakdown by Activity Year 

Total 

5 Year 

Yr. (1) 

Yr. (2) 

Yr. (3) 

Yr. (4) 

Yr. (5) 

(a) Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(b) Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(c) Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(d) Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(e) Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(f) Contractual 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(g) Other 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(h) Total Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(i) Indirect Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

$0 

(j) Total Activity Amount 

$0 

$0 

$0 

$0 

$0 

$0 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

Administration of awards resulting from this RFA will be guided by standard provisions 
included in the award dependent on the organization (whether US or Non-US) that is selected. 

 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the “required as applicable” Standard Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations: 

 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

TBD 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

√ 

 

 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PREDETERMINED (NOVEMBER 2020) 

√ 

 

 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PROVISIONAL (Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

√ 

 

 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - 
PROVISIONAL (Profit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

√ 

 

 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

√ 

 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 




 

 

√ 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A 
RESEARCH SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 

 

 

√ 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 
2004) 

 

√ 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY 
(COOPERATING COUNTRY TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

√ 

 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 
2012) 

 

√ 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

 

√ 

 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 
2003) 

 

√ 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

√ 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

√ 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE 
OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING 
(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

√ 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE 
(DECEMBER 2004) 

 

 

√ 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS 
INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

√ 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT 
FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 




 

 

√ 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR 
ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE 
OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

√ 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR 
AWARD MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

√ 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

√ 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

√ 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

√ 

 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA 
INSURANCE UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

√ 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE 
MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

√ 

RAA29. RESERVED 

√ 

 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

√ 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

TBD 

 

Required 

 

Not Required 

 

Standard Provision 

√ 

 

 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 




√ 

 

 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND 
REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

√ 

 

 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT 
COST RATE AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

√ 

 

 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED 
AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

√ 

 

 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

√ 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF 
AWARD MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

√ 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

√ 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

√ 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR 
TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

√ 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

 

√ 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

√ 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

√ 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 
2003) 

√ 

 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

√ 

 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

√ 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS 
TO INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 




√ 

 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR 
THE DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS 
INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

√ 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH 
SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF 
SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, 
OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

√ 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

√ 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 
2014) 

 

 

√ 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

√ 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-
LOCAL ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

√ 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA 
INSURANCE UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

√ 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND 
CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND 
PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 




 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

 

√ 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 3 - PERFORMANCE REVIEW TEMPLATE FOR ASSISTANCE AWARDS 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.205, all federal grant-making agencies must review the risk posed 
by Recipients. This is a performance review template for Agreement Officer’s Representatives 
(AORs) to use in monitoring and documenting performance under Agency assistance awards. 

 

Recipient: Award Number: 

AOR: Award Period: 

AO: 

 

PERFORMANCE ELEMENTS 

I. AWARD PERFORMANCE – MANDATORY ELEMENT 

Illustrative Questions: Was the recipient successful in achieving its goals as specified in the 
award? Did the recipient face any obstacles that hindered it from achieving its goals and if so, 
was the recipient proactive and responsive in addressing the obstacles? Was the recipient able 
to effectively plan and manage its award? 

The AOR must provide a narrative addressing the recipient’s performance highlighting any 
significant achievements (or problems) during the award period. 

 

II. QUALITY OF MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS – MANDATORY ELEMENT 

Illustrative Questions: Were the recipient’s procurement system and internal policies effective 
in the management of the award? Were the recipient’s systems or policies reviewed by USAID 
prior to award or during the award period? Was the recipient’s governance and management 
structure effective for ensuring successful performance? Did the recipient effectively manage 
its subawards? Did the recipient effectively manage its cash flow and liquidate its pipeline in a 
timely manner, i.e., did the recipient only draw down funds necessary to cover current 
expenses? Did the recipient successfully manage its award in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of the award and the award’s approved budget? When issues arose did the recipient 
have sufficient means to address them, with minimal USAID involvement? Were there any 
changes to the recipient’s management systems during the award period? 

The AOR must provide a narrative addressing the recipient’s management systems. 

 

 

III. COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS – MANDATORY ELEMENT 

Illustrative Questions: Did the recipient comply with the terms and conditions of the award? 
Did the recipient submit financial and performance progress reports in a timely manner? Did 
the recipient’s reports meet the requirements of the award? 




The AOR must provide a narrative addressing the recipient’s ability to effectively implement 
statutory, regulatory, reporting, or other requirements imposed on the recipient by the award. 

 

 

IV. REPORTS AND AUDIT FINDINGS – IF APPLICABLE 

Illustrative Questions: Were there any external or internal reports or audits on the recipient 
during the award period? What steps did the recipient take to address issues raised in the 
reports? 

If audits or other similar reports on the recipient were conducted during the award period and 
are readily available to the AOR, the AOR should provide a narrative addressing these reports 
or audit findings and note any steps the recipient took to address issues raised. 

 

 

AOR SIGNATURE 

AO SIGNATURE 

AOR’s Signature goes here 

AO’s Signature goes here 

 
Date 

 
Date 

 

(Indicates AO accepts AOR’s review) 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ANNEX 4 – USAID/Malawi Local Compensation Plan (LCP) Guide- Effective November 
07, 2021 

Job Category 

Hrs./Week 

Grade Range 

Basic Salary Range 

Allowances Range 

 

 

 

 

 

Senior professionals 

40 

FSN 13 

$52,714 - $81,708 

$10,536 - $15,301 

Senior professionals 

40 

FSN 12 

$37,650 - $58,530 

$10,536 - $15,301 

Senior professionals 

40 

FSN 11 

$30,074 - $46,622 

$8,793 - $12,599 

Middle professionals 

40 

FSN 10 

$26,226 - $40,646 

$7,908 - $11,225 

Middle professionals 

40 

FSN 9 

$19,532 - $30,270 

$5,454 - $7,924 



 

Notes on table 

i. Basic Salary above is set in US Dollars. 
ii. Applicants must develop a local policy to deal with significant exchange movements 
that might adversely affect local salaries that are paid in local currency in accordance 
with the host country laws.” 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 5 – FRAMEWORK OF OBJECTIVES 

 

Diagram, text
Description automatically generated 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 6 – MALAWI RAPID FEEDBACK MONITORING SYSTEM (RFMS) 

 

Text
Description automatically generated

 

Text
Description automatically generated 


 


 

ANNEX 7 – ILLUSTRATIVE INDICATORS 

Objectives 

Expected Results 

LOP 
Targets 

High Level Objective 

Number of integration interventions completed 
and/or initiated in collaboration with 
USAID/Malawi partners or development 
partners 

TBD 

1. Rural incomes and assets increased in key growth poles 

 

 

1.1 Number of people with new employment 
(increase over baseline) (disaggregate by sex 
and youth or not, and new and continuing) 

TBD 

 

1.2 Increase in average annual income of 
participant households, disaggregated by sex 
and age (increase over the baseline) 

100% 

 

1.3 Degree of knock-on, spillover effects in each 
Growth Pole sphere of influence (methodology 
TBD) 

10% 

1.1 Sustainable and inclusive economic growth 
poles that are private sector led, created and/or 
strengthened in conditional partnership 
arrangements 

1.1.1 private-sector led growth poles created 
and/or strengthened 

20 

1.1.2 leveraged and/or mobilized private sector 
resources 

$500 Mill 

1.1.3 Custom 2: Value of new USG 
commitments and private sector investment 
leveraged by the USG to support non-
agricultural commodities 

TBD 




1.1.4 Value of partnerships (written agreements, 
contracts, and deals) formally signed between 
organizations, private sector (incl farmers) as a 
result of USG assistance (custom) 

120,000 
farmers 

 

1.1.5 CBLD-9 Percent of USG-assisted 
organizations with improved performance 

TBD 

1.2 Formalized, expanded and more competitive 
MSMEs ecosystem (MSMEs includes farmers 
cooperatives) 

1.2.1 Increase in competitiveness of activity 
value chains 

TBD 

 

1.2.2 Number of individuals participating in 
organized, productive consolidated group 
(cooperative, association, disaggregated by 
formal and informal) 

TBD 

 

1.2.3 Smallholder gross margins per unit 
(hectare, enterprise, etc.) 

1.2.4 Direct MSME beneficiaries increased sales 

 

100% 

1.3. Improved productivity and yields 

1.3.1 Number of individuals who have applied 
improved management practices or technologies 

TBD 

 

1.3.2 Increased yield of targeted agricultural 
commodities 

300% 

 

1.3.4 Number of hectares under improved 
management practices or technologies 

30,000 
ha: soil & 
water 
mgmt 

 

1.3.5 Access and utilization of energy 
(disaggregated by type) 

TBD 




1.4. Credit and finance mobilized, expanded and 

1.4.1 Number of MSMEs, entrepreneurs and/or 
farmers receiving private-sector financing 
(credit or equity) 

TBD 

1.4.2 Value of financing accessed as a result of 
USG assistance total financing 

$30 Mill 

1.4.3 Number of MSMEs, 
cooperatives/associations, entrepreneurs and/or 
farmers receiving capacity enhancement 
assistance (through acceleration, financial 
services and technical assistance, business 
planning, etc.) 

TBD 

 

1.4.4 Number of individuals participating in 
USG-assisted group-based savings, micro-
finance, or lending programs (standard) 

TBD 

1.5. Value-added and processing increased across 
diverse sectors expanded and made more 
accessible and competitive 

 1.5.1 Value addition increase over baseline 

200% 

1.6. Private sector investments 
increased sustainability and inclusivity. 

 

 

1.7. Regional and US-Malawi trade expanded 

1.7.1 Increased value of targeted commodities 
exported 

200% 

2. Women, youth and vulnerable households’ economic opportunities Expanded 

 

2.1. Youth age 18 to 35 participation in, and 
incomes increased 

2.1.1 Disaggregates for youth of indicators 
above 

TBD 

2.1.3 Disaggregates for youth of indicators 
above 

TBD 




2.2. Women’s participation in economic activities 
and incomes increased 

2.2.1 Disaggregates for women of indicators 
above 

TBD 

 

2.2.2 GNDR-8: No. of persons trained with 
USG assistance to advance outcomes consistent 
with gender equality or female empowerment 
through their roles in public or private sector 
institutions or organization (disaggregate for 
both youth and gender) 

T BD 

 

2.2.3 GNDR-2: Percentage of female 
participants in USG-assisted programs designed 
to increase access to productive economic 
resources 

TBD 

2.3. Enhanced economic inclusion among all 
beneficiaries, and especially economically 
disadvantaged or marginalized groups and 
households (vulnerable HHs) 

2.3.1 Disaggregation of key indicators to 
demonstrate access by smallholder farmers and 
vulnerable households 

TBD 

3. Resilience of households, communities and systems strengthened 

 

 

3.1 Percentage of households overcoming 
shocks through sustainable means in USG-
assisted districts 

TBD 

 

3.2 Decrease in humanitarian 
assistance/emergency assistance based on 
decreased need for it at HH level 

TBD 

 

3.3 Percentage change in access to nutritious 
food for BoP consumers; Percentage change in 
the rural population that is food secure. 

TBD 

3.1. Increased beneficiary household resilience as 
measured by RFMS methodologies (adaptive 
capacity, diversification, assets, nutrition, access 

3.1.1 Utilizing RFMS indicators, change in 
adaptive and absorptive index score at HH level. 

50% 
increase 




3.1.2 Index of social capital at the household 

to health and education) agricultural 
diversification, yields, value of total production, 
natural resource management and profit/income. 

TBD 

3.1.3 Number of people using and/or adopting 
tools, technologies, information, and processes 
that help with adaptation to and recovery from 
shocks and stresses (composite of indicators 
from 1.3) 

TBD 

 

3.1.4 Number of individuals participating in 
USG food security programs (standard) 

TBD 

 

3.1.4 Percent of households below the 
comparative threshold for the poorest quintile of 
the Asset-Based Comparative Wealth Index 
(standard) 

TBD 

 

3.1.5 Prevalence of Poverty: Percent of people 
living on less than $1.90/day 2011 PPP ZOI-
level (standard) 

TBD 

 

3.1.6 Change in incomes for smallholder 
farmers and MSMEs, achieving earnings more 
than $2 per day. 

TBD 

 

3.1.7 Household Asset Index of the targeted 
households 

TBD 

 

3.1.8 Proportion of targeted households with an 
acceptable food consumption score (FCS>35) 

TBD 

 

3.1.9 HHs which have adopted CSA 
technologies 

TBD 

 

3.1.10 Number of food deficit months 

TBD 




 

3.1.11 Improved Household Dietary Diversity 
Score (HDDS) 

TBD 

 

 Minimum Acceptable Diets (MAD) for 
children 

TBD 

3.2. Transformative systems-level capacities built 
among GOM, civil society, that support private 
sector modernization and resilience 

3.2.1 Institutions, communities and households 
utilizing climate or other data sources and 
information or implementing risk-reducing 
actions to improve resilience to climate change: 
climate-smart seed and/or seedlings accessed by 
farmers 

500,000 
farmers 

4. Sustainable Natural Resource Management Improved 

 

 

4.1 Number of people with improved economic 
benefits derived from sustainable natural 
resource management as a result of USG 
assistance 

4.2 Arable hectares under improved soil and 
water management 

 

 

150,000 
ha 

4.1. Reduce reliance on unsustainable charcoal 

4.1.1 HHs using unsustainable charcoal and or 
unsustainable fuelwood reduced 

TBD 

4.3.1 custom indicators using other indicators 
above 

TBD 

4.2. Foster private sector led sustainable forestry 
products and services 

4.3.2 Number of people trained in climate 
change adaptation supported by USG assistance 

TBD 

4.3. Improved climate resilience through 
integrated, private sector/growth pole led 
approaches 

 

TBD 




4.4. Increased contribution to greenhouse 
emissions mitigation and reduction. 

 

TBD 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 8 – USAID’S TECHNICAL GUIDANCE ON GEOSPATIAL METADATA 
STANDARDS 

 

Text, letter
Description automatically generated

 

Text, letter
Description automatically generated 


 


ANNEX 10 – SUMMARY LIST OF AGDIV RESEARCH 

 

Text
Description automatically generated with low confidence 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 11 – LIST OF USAID INNOVATION LABS 

List of USAID Innovation Labs 


Text, letter
Description automatically generated
[END OF REQUEST FOR APPLICATION - 72061222RFA00006] 

 


