 

 

 

Issue Date: August 17, 2021 

Deadline for Questions: August 31, 2021, at 05:00 pm (Maputo Time) 

Closing Date & Time: September 30, 2021, at 05:00 pm (Maputo Time) 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) 

Request for Application (RFA) Number: 72065621RFA00011 

 

Program Title: Advancing Girls Education (AGE) Activity 

 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the Advancing Girls Education 
(AGE) Activity. 

 

Eligibility for this RFA is restricted to Local Entities as defined below. 

 

For the purpose of this section, local entity means an individual, a corporation, a nonprofit 
organization, or another body of persons that: 

 

(1) is legally organized under the laws of; 
(2) has as its principal place of business or operations in; 
(3) is majority owned by individuals who are citizens or lawful permanent residents of; and 
(4) managed by a governing body, the majority of who are citizens or lawful permanent 
residents of a country receiving assistance from funds appropriated under title III of this 
Act. (c) 


 

For purposes of this section, “majority-owned’ and “-managed by” include, without limitation, 
beneficiary interests and the power, either directly or indirectly, whether exercisable, to control 
the election, appointment, or tenure of the organization's managers or a majority of the 
organization's governing body by any means. 

 

These eligibility requirements apply to only the principal Applicant. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this 


funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this RFA and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this RFA. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the RFA has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the RFA, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at suport@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please also send any questions to the points of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be 
furnished to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to 
www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are 
submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s 
expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

Jean-Jacques Badiane 

Agreement Officer 

 


 

Table of Content 

 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 27 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 29 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 30 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 50 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 54 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS 59 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 60 
ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 61 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 62 
ANNEX 3 – WORK PLAN TEMPLATE 65 
ANNEX 4 – MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING PLAN TEMPLATE 65 
ANNEX 5 – NOFO WEBSITE LINKS 65 


 


 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This is a United States Agency for International Development (USAID) funding opportunity 
authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as amended. The resulting award will 
be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit 
Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional 
requirements found in Section F. 

 

1. Introduction 


 

Through this solicitation, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) 
intends to identify a uniquely qualified Contractor to implement a five-year Cooperative 
Agreement activity, to increase retention of girls ages 10-19 in school who are vulnerable or at risk 
of dropping out of school due to physical, sexual, or psychological violence at school, teen 
pregnancy, or child marriage. The Activity will support the Government of the Republic of 
Mozambique’s (GRM) strategy of school-based reform in local communities to improve student 
retention and create access to education for girls and improve their learning environment. 

 

Strategies within the Education and Health Ministries highlight the focus on quality service 
delivery. Both ministries have a strong gender strategy that focuses on reducing barriers to girls’ 
education and health-seeking services which are directly linked to the national gender strategy. and 
partake in the gender coordination group led by the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social 
Action. The Ministry of Education Strategic Education Plan for 2020-2029 supports the 
implementation of an inclusive, equitable, effective, and innovative national education system, 
capable of guaranteeing lifelong quality learning. 

 

The Activity will contribute to the GRM Education Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) goal of gender 
equity and equal opportunities for all students as well as to the USAID/Mozambique Country 
Development Cooperation Strategy’s (CDCS) 2020 – 2025, five-year Development Objective 1: 
“Healthier and Better Educated Mozambicans, Especially the Young and Vulnerable” and 
Intermediate Result 1.2: “Utilization of Health and Education Services Expanded, Focused on 
Youth and Gender.” 

 

2. Background 


 

While significant progress has been made by the Government of Mozambique in raising primary 
school enrolment over the past decade, primary school completion is less than 50%. Dropout rates 
for girls are highest in the early grades and before they reach the end of grade 5. Few girls finish 
primary school (46%), and even fewer finish secondary school (22%). More than 56% of women 


are illiterate (upwards of 70% in rural areas).1 An estimated number of 1.2 million children are out 
of school, with more girls than boys especially in secondary age group (12 to 18), and this is linked 
to poverty as well as social norms. Early marriage and pregnancy are major factors affecting the 
retention of adolescent girls in school. According to UNICEF Mozambique Country Program 
2017-2020, high levels of girls dropping out of school is attributed to the poor quality of schooling, 
household poverty, social norms, and cultural practices such as initiation rites and early marriage. 
Inadequate social protection and lack of sensitivity to vulnerable children are other reasons 
keeping girls from finishing school. 

1 PEPFAR Mozambique Gender Analysis Country Operational Planning 2016, pgs 8-9 and 

 Perfil de Género de Moçambique, 2016, pg 9. 

2 Education Sector Strategic Plan, 2020-2029, p.25. 

3 Education | Mozambique | U.S. Agency for International Development [Internet]. [cited 2017 Mar 7]. Available 
from: https://www.usaid.gov/mozambique/education. 

4 Education Sector Strategic Plan, 2020-2029, p.26. 

5 Education Sector Strategic Plan, 2020-2029, p.26. 

6 Global Monitoring Report, (UNESCO, 2015, p.7. 

7 http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/mz 

8 UNESCO, UNGEI, Global Monitoring Report. Global Education Monitoring Report 2016: Gender Review. 
Creating Sustainable Futures For All. [Internet]. Paris: Global Education Monitoring Report team; 2016. Available 
from: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002460/246045e.pdf . 

9 Drivdal A. UNICEF and partners focus on the prevention of sexual abuse against girls in Mozambique [Internet]. 
UNICEF. [cited 2019 Apr 11]. Available from: https://www.unicef.org/childsurvival/mozambique_60144.html . 

Bloemen S. Support centers protect children from violence and abuse in Mozambique: UNICEF and leading 
musicians promote child rights [Internet]. UNICEF. 2010 [cited 2019 Apr 11]. Available from: 
https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/mozambique_53987.html . 

 

Between 2004 and 2018, 48% of students in lower primary school (grades 1-3) and 46.8 % in 
upper primary (grades 4-6) were girls.2 Almost half of enrolled girls drop out of school by grade 5, 
and among girls enrolled in primary school, only 11% continue to secondary school, and one 
percent go to college.3 Safety and security hinder the inclusion of girls in the education system and 
decrease their participation in all subsystems. Girls from disadvantaged families in the northern 
region are the most affected and face learning difficulties and high dropout rates. Discriminatory 
sociocultural beliefs and practices are more severe in the northern region (MINEDH 2018)4. 
Efforts are underway to sensitize the population and reduce Gender Based Violence (GBV) 
attitudes that prevent girls from enrolling, attending and staying in school (MINEDH, 2018)5. The 
Global Monitoring Report6 states that achieving gender equality in education requires not only 
girls and boys having an equal chance to participate in education, but also a gender-sensitive 
learning environment. UNESCO data show that while almost all boys and girls are enrolled in 
primary school, the gross enrollment ratio at the secondary level is 33% for girls and 37% for 
boys.7 According to the Global Monitoring Report, some of the most common reasons for lower 
school retention for girls, even at the primary level, in the central and northern parts of the country 
include poverty, higher domestic workloads for girls, the lack of female role models, sexual abuse 
in school and household, and early pregnancy.8 Qualitative data affirm the link between sexual 
abuse and educational attainment, and UNICEF has established and supported initiatives to address 
sexual abuse to promote girls’ education.9 

 


As in many sectors and countries, gaps remain between policy and implementation. Many schools 
still lack the technical guidance to improve gender equality, and few school manuals directly 
address gender issues, according to contacts in the Ministry of Education and Human Development 
(MINEDH) and the Education for All Movement (MEPT). Gaps also exist in laws and policies in 
response to violence, abuse, and transgression of rules and all too often, the rule of law is 
irregularly applied, and citizens who fail to follow the law do so with impunity and without fear of 
legal retribution. 

 

New efforts have emerged to prioritize and advance girls' access to education. The Education 
Sector Strategic Education Plan 2020-2029, aligned with the Gender Strategy of the Education 
sector developed in 2016, promote access, retention and successful school completion for girls and 
boys at all levels of education and the elimination of gender disparities10. The Promoting 
Advancement of Girls' Education in Mozambique (PAGE-M) project is tackling the policy to 
implementation gap directly by working with the government to garner support for and scale-up of 
best practices to reduce demand-side barriers, promote and improve girl-friendly schools, and 
increase the quality of education11. In other work, MINEDH has produced radio campaigns and 
advertisements to encourage families to enroll their children in schools, with a focus on enrolling 
daughters and valuing girls’ education. It has adopted a “spokesperson” approach, which 
mobilizes national and regional celebrities and religious leaders of different faiths to rally 
grassroots and family support for school enrollment.12 

10 Education Sector Strategic Plan 2020-2029, MINEDH, p.51. 

11 Center for Education Innovations. Promoting Advancement of Girls’ Education in Mozambique (PAGE-M) 
[Internet]. Center for Education Innovations. 2015 [cited 2017 Mar 7]. Available from: /program/promoting-
advancement-girls%E2%80%99-education-mozambique-page-m. 

12 International Federation for Human Rights. Women’s Rights in Mozambique. Paris: International Federation for 
Human Rights; 2007. 

13 Ministry of Education and Human Development, 2019. 

14 Ministry of Education and Human Development, 2018. 

 

3. Problem Analysis and Theory of Change 


 

Problem Analysis 

 

The MINEDH ten-year strategic plan (2020-2029) highlights that schools are a long way from 
providing a safe and supportive environment for human development and protection of the rights 
of children in general, and girls in particular. Little progress has been made in protecting girls from 
gender-based violence, in particular sexual violence. Lack of water and safe bathrooms at school 
are still factors causing insecurity for girls13. Another challenge is the low school completion rates 
for girls, which are consistently lower when compared to boys. Girls from disadvantaged families, 
particularly in the northern provinces, experience learning difficulties and high rates of dropping 
out of school. In this region, socio-cultural beliefs and discriminatory practices are “more 
severe”14. The Ministry of Education Sector Strategic Plan further states the importance of 
combating such beliefs and practices, including School Related Gender Based Violence (SRGBV). 
Girls between the ages 10-19 who remain in school are less likely to experience early marriage and 
early pregnancy. 


 

Challenges Girls Face Accessing School Reflect and Reinforced by Inequitable Gender 
Norms 

Gaps in girls’ access to education exist against a backdrop of larger societal gender inequalities, 
including a lack of value placed on girls’ education and unequal earning potential relative to their 
male siblings and peers. There exist systemic and structural barriers to girls’ schooling where 
sexual abuse, SRGBV, and harmful traditional practices affect their experience. Girls, especially in 
the Center and North of Mozambique, are often kept from school by their parents’ dismissal of the 
value of education, or concern for their safety. Zambezia and Nampula provinces contain the 
highest rates of child marriage and the highest number of married girls15. Other challenges facing 
girls include many families in Mozambique move about in their search for fertile land for 
agriculture, resulting in an average of 15 to 20 kilometers walking distance between girls and the 
nearest school. Lack of access to transportation, family fear of and risk of violence during transit to 
school, and the additional time and workload requirements in domestic work for girls and young 
wives all compound to reduce girls’ enrollment and retention in school. 

15 Child Marriage and Adolescent Pregnancy in Mozambique: Policy Brief. UNICEF, 2014, p.5. 

16 CARE. Hope dries up? Women and Girls coping with Drought and Climate Change in Mozambique 
[Internet]. CARE International; 2016 [cited 2019 Jan 16]. Available from: 
https://primarysources.brillonline.com/browse/climate-change-and-law-collection/hope-dries-up-women-
and-girls-coping-with-drought-and-climate-change-in-mozambique;cccc013420160134006 , p.4-5. 

 

Poor Support for Puberty and Menstruation Complicates Girls’ Schooling 

Social customs combined with lack of sanitary supplies and limited access to water, sanitation, and 
hygiene facilities in schools often keep girls out of school during their monthly menstruation. 
Menarche, and the onset of puberty, therefore, coincides with frequent extended absence from 
school for girls and increases their risk for school drop-out as they fall behind their male peers. For 
example, the 2016 drought affecting Mozambique limited access to sanitary supplies for menstrual 
hygiene because the traditionally used absorbent plant material was scarcer, and as food and cash 
reserves in households dwindled, women’s ability to purchase menstrual supplies was limited.16As 
a result, many girls and women resorted to using other, harsher, plant matter or used sand during 
their menstrual cycle. 

 

Education stakeholders highlighted that puberty and menarche also frequently coincide with 
increased risk for child, early and forced marriage, which in turn contributes to lower enrollment 
for girls. Once married, girls are expected to focus on their role in the household, and further 
schooling is seen as an unnecessary cost, or even a threat to the household hierarchy if girls are 
more educated than their spouses. Early Marriage resulting in early sexual activity and unwanted 
pregnancy can also increase girls’ and young women’s risk for sexually transmitted diseases, 
including fistula, and may prevent their participation in school. 

 

Lack of Women in Leadership Positions in Schools and School Management Committees 

Education stakeholders highlighted the negative impact of the low numbers of women in positions 
of leadership on school management committees and other educational institutions. Although 
women in communities often help select community leaders, they seldom elect other women to 


leadership positions because they are influenced by patriarchal social norms. Women who are 
leaders or teachers experience difficulty finding safe and appropriate housing since most schools 
are outside urban and peri-urban areas. 

 

Sexual Violence in and Around Schools is a Fear and a Reality 

Violence is also a factor in keeping girls away from school, as the risk of sexual abuse and 
SRGBV going and returning to/from school is a key consideration for families and there are no 
systemic mechanisms to combat physical violence in the school setting. Frequent sexual 
harassment and violence in schools occurs not only among students and peers but is frequently 
perpetrated by teachers and other authority figures. Girls and women often must travel long 
distances to school and use public transportation early in the morning or late at night and can face 
sexual harassment or assault. Addressing violence in schools can have an immediate impact on 
girls’ access to education. The Stop Violence Against Girls in Schools project has reported 
improved educational outcomes for girls as a result of their initiatives.17 MINEDH and its partners 
developed, coordinate and monitor the implementation of a “Zero Tolerance” campaign, to raise 
awareness in schools and communities to eliminate abuse and sexual harassment at all levels and 
empower boys and girls to recognize and protect themselves from violence through interactive 
activities. 

17 Parkes J, Heslop J. Stop violence against girls in schools: A cross-country analysis of change in Ghana, Kenya, 
and Mozambique [Internet]. ActionAid International; 2013 [cited 2017 Feb 28]. Available from: 
http://eprints.ioe.ac.uk/18913/1/svags_review_final.pdf 

18 Osório C, Silva TC e. Entre a denúncia e o silêncio: análise da aplicação da lei contra a violência doméstica 
(2009-2015). Maputo: WLSA; 2016. UNICEF. Avaliação dos gabinetes modelo de atendimento à mulher e criança. 
Relatório Final. Maputo: UNICEF; 2010. 

19 Basílio A. Papel do Conselho de Escola no sistema educativo moçambicano: um estudo de caso. [Internet]. 
Universidade Católica Portuguesa; 2014. Available from: 
https://repositorio.ucp.pt/bitstream/10400.14/14907/1/FINAL_REVISTA_Papel%2 

 

Lack of Accountability Reinforces a Sexual Double Standard and Undermines School 
Quality 

Gendered social norms in Mozambique prize girls’ virginity and hold girls and young women 
responsible for sexual violence or other assaults they may experience.18 Consequently, families 
often isolate daughters in order to “protect” them and preserve their social status and 
marriageability. Survivors of domestic or other sexual violence may refuse to report to police, 
families, health providers, and others. As several civil society key informant demonstrate, 
communities place more value on their local authorities (i.e., elders, community tribunals) to solve 
the problem according to the community’s norms. For those who do report sexual assault or other 
violence, victim-blaming, and failure to maintain confidentiality can be major challenges. 

 

School Councils Could Play a Stronger Role but Need to be Empowered 

The school councils have enormous potential for improving school quality and mediating between 
stakeholders in the community and the schools themselves. Composed of teachers, principals, 
parent representatives, school staff and male and female students, they could be an important 
accountability mechanism. As in other bodies where women are well represented, women and girls 
may not participate fully without encouragement.19 Broader weaknesses in the school councils 


include that while their membership is set by MINEDH, community members are appointed by 
teachers, which violates the rules. At the level of primary education, rural parents and community 
leaders are strongly involved in school affairs because the schools are nearby.20 Urban parents 
are more involved in school councils and even participate in decision-making (e.g., in Maputo 
City, Nampula and Quelimane), but they are not involved in monitoring the school administration. 
Rural parents are rarely active in secondary school councils since these schools are in urban areas 
and are therefore far away. 

20 Sanchez. PSIA II-Follow up Study of Primary Education and Baseline Study of Secondary Education, 
Mozambique. World Bank; 2007. 

21 Basílio A. Papel do Conselho de Escola no sistema educativo moçambicano: um estudo de caso. [Internet]. 
Universidade Católica Portuguesa; 2014. Available from: 
https://repositorio.ucp.pt/bitstream/10400.14/14907/1/final_revista_papel%2 

usaid.gov gender assessment for country development cooperation strategy | 730do%20conselho%20de% 

The relationships of parents and school councils with teachers and school directors can be 
conflictual. Although community members are meant to participate, the school principals hold all 
the power, since they convene the meetings. The case study conducted by Basílio (2014) found 
that the principal in one school had not convened management nor the community for more than 
two years.21 

 

Theory of Change Statement 

 

Through Advancing Girls Education (AGE), the activity's main purpose is to improve the retention 
of girls between the ages of 10-19 in school as a prerequisite to better livelihoods and career 
choices. To achieve this goal, AGE will improve school access, improve teacher skills and 
behaviors, and increase social services such as health, Water and Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH); 
improve community support towards girl’s education, and increase safety of girls at school by 
reducing their vulnerability to early marriage and pregnancy, sexual transmitted diseases, and 
School Related Gender Based Violence (SRGBV). Involving parents, /guardians, school councils 
and community leaders will motivate the entire community to act in the best interest of girls by 
delivering and monitoring the implementation of educational messages promoting gender equality 
in education, prevention of early marriage, pregnancy and SRGBV at school and community and 
use of sanitation services. 

 

The Theory of Change posits that: if USAID Advancing Girls Education improve access to 
school for girls age 10-19, improve teacher skills and behaviors, increase girls’ access to key social 
services such as health, WASH, increase the community support towards girl’s education; and if 
increase safety of girls at school and household, by reducing their vulnerability to early marriage 
and pregnancy, sexual transmitted diseases and Sexual Reproductive Gender Based Violence 
(SRGBV), then retention of girls in school will be increased. 

 

4. OBJECTIVE 


 

USAID/Mozambique aims to support the development of the Mozambican Education sector by 
implementing girl’s education activities focused on “increasing retention of girls (10-19) in 
school”. To achieve this goal, Advancing Girls Education will (1) improve access to school for 


girls and increase the community support towards girl’s education; (2) improve girls’ retention, 
and performance in upper primary and secondary schools; (3) increase girls’ access to key social 
services such as health, WASH; and (4) increase safety of girls at school and household by 
reducing their vulnerability to early marriage and pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and 
School Related Gender Based Violence (SRGBV). Thus, the Contractor for the implementation of 
this Activity will pursue it by reaching the following results highlighted in the Results Framework: 

 




Goal: 


Increased retention of girls 
(10
-
19) in school 


Improve girls (10
-
19) access 
to school and community 
support to girls education 


Improve girls’ retention, and 
performance in upper primary 
and secondary schools 


Increased knowladge of girls 
, 
caregivers and household of 
benefits of girls (10
-
19) 
education. 


Increased girls (10
-
19) 
access to key social services 
(Health, Wash, Justice) 


Improved school environment 
for girls (10
-
19) 


Increased safety of girls (10
-
19) at school and household 
(early marriage, sexual 
assault, sexual transmited 
diseases and SRGBV) 


Incresed girls (10
-
19) 
knowladge of their rights 


Advancing Girls Education Results Framework 

 

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


The activity will collaborate with USAID’s three existing activities DREAMS, Integrated Family 
Planning Project (IFPP), Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC), and other supply 
chain activities described above, as well as with activities of other major education donors working 
in the same districts and/or provinces. The Activity is also expected to seek opportunities for better 
coordination among GRM ministries – Ministry of Education, Ministry of Gender and Social 
Action – and other major donors implementing education and gender activities. Strong 
USAID/GRM/donor coordination may include joint annual work plan development with 
Implementing Partners in the target geographic areas; establishment of joint mechanisms for 
coordination and dialogue with relevant GRM institutions, civil society, and citizen stakeholders; 
and joint monitoring and evaluation planning and implementation. 

 

5. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 


 

Advancing Girls Education consists of four components, which when integrated, will contribute to 
each other’s results and to the activity’s overall objectives. The four components focus on: (1) 
improving access to safe, community-supported schools; (2) improving teachers’ skills to promote 
learning and outcomes and better behavior for students; (3) increasing access to key social 
services; and (4) increase school and household safety for girls (Early marriage and pregnancy, 
sexual transmitted diseases and SRGBV). 

 

Component 1: Increased access to school for girls ages 10-19 and increased community support 
towards girl’s education. 

 

Education is a core thematic priority of the current strategy the USAID Mission, along-side child 
and girls’ rights. Although education of children is universally accepted as a leading mechanism of 
poverty eradication and social development, many developing nations continue to struggle in 


achieving gender parity in primary and secondary education. While Mozambique has recently 
accelerated its efforts to reduce this gap, girls are still enrolled and attending school at a much 
lower rate than boys22. The Activity will promote girls-centered education by promoting 
community participation and accountability to reduce barriers of education for girls such as 
harmful social norms, stereotypes and SRGBV, including engagement of girls and boys throughout 
the implementation. To improve girls’ access, retention, and safety in primary and secondary 
schools in Zambézia and Nampula target districts, Advancing Girls Education will first identify the 
main barriers hindering education for girls and the prerequisite to better livelihoods and career 
choices. AGE will target barriers that are known as major bottlenecks affecting girls’ education in 
Mozambique such as early marriages, underage pregnancies, teachers, and students’ absenteeism, 
limited financial resources from the guardians’ side and poor school facilities that affect school 
attendance, learning outcomes, completion, and transition. Though these barriers also affect boys, 
girls are severely affected due to gender stereotypes, social norms, and traditional beliefs. The 
Activity is expected to help schools and district offices use a gender sensitive and transformational 
approach and increase gender equity in education and health programs and services. It involves 
working with individual, community, structural, social, and political levels. In line with the 
Education Sector Plan (ESP) 2020-2029, the Activity will implement activities that develop girls’ 
leadership skills to stay in school and succeed. 

22 Ministry of Education and Human Development, 2019. 

23 Save the Children Research: Girls’ Education Assessing opportunities and challenges for transition to, 
attendance, learning outcomes and completion of secondary school education for girls in Mozambique 
2017. 

 

 Expected Results:to improve the quality of teaching, with emphasis on the gender-sensitivity of 
teaching that will lead to better girls’ learning outcomes for girls. 

 

● Vulnerable girls have a safe environment to stay in school and succeed 
● Vulnerable girls have a safe environment while attending school and social beliefs support 
their graduation 
● Increased Girls (and boys) knowledge to champion and exercise their rights in school and 
household and be free from fear of violence, underage pregnancy, and early marriage. 
● Increased community knowledge of the importance of education for girls. 
● Increased community participation to advocate for education for girls and other social 
rights. 
● Increased channel of community protection for girls in school and household. 
● Increased capacity of girls, boys, and community to recognize harmful attitudes. 
● Increased capacity of girls to fully exercise their right to education and social services. 


 

Component 2: Improved girls’ retention, and performance in upper primary and secondary 
schools in target districts. Violence and lack of gender-sensitive teaching methodology affect the 
quality of learning for girls.23 Teachers are the most important factor affecting learning outcomes 
in Mozambique. However, many times, teachers lack the skills or motivation to be effective. Low 
numbers of female teachers also affect retention and quality of learning. Although new teachers 
have been hired, these teachers’ low level of education, low morale and poor teaching skills and 


● Teachers have the skills and behaviors to increase girls' learning. Focus on teaching 
quality (in literacy and numeracy), general teaching skills behavior (including absenteeism 
and treatment of girls) at grades 5–10, with particular emphasis on grade 5 and grade 7. 
● Collaborating with some select teachers’ colleges and reinforcing their curriculum and 
processes with regard to pedagogic approaches. 





gender-sensitive methods compromise the quality and learning achievements. The Activity is 
expected Working hand in hand with the existing Teachers training institutes to improve their 
processes and encouraging hiring female teachers and having them as role models would 
accelerate girls’ performance. 

Expected Results: 

 Component 3: increasing girls’ access to key social services such as Health and WASH. 

Over 48% of the total estimated population in Mozambique lack safe water and 77% are without 
improved sanitation and hygiene.24 The country lacks policy in hygiene and sanitation, and the 
implementation of other WASH related policies and strategies is weak. The high level of poverty, 
weak and ineffective citizen participation and social inequality affect the capacity of beneficiaries 
to contribute to maintenance costs of water and sanitation systems. This exacerbates the threat to 
sustainability of WASH investments.25 The Activity will use the experience of AEB/UNICEF 
Activity to provide behavior change messages to promote adequate use of latrines and key 
information on the importance of washing hands, before and after the use of latrines to reduce the 
incidence of common waterborne diseases such as diarrhea, malaria and cholera including 
adequate management of menstruation for girls and promote a healthy and safe environment in 
schools. Advancing Girls Education will focus on strengthening girls, boys, and other actors’ 
capacity to understand and exercise their rights to WASH, health services and influence policy 
implementation and accountability that enable equitable and sustainable WASH services at all 
levels. The activity will focus on social and behavior change (SBC) to increase adoption of key 
WASH behaviors and address harmful gender norms that prohibit women and girls from equally 
benefiting from WASH and sanitation services. 

24 UNDP Human Development Report 2015. 

25 Mozambique Country Program Strategy 2016 – 2021. WaterAid Mozambique. 

 

At the primary school, the activity will ensure good use of existing water and sanitation facilities – 
including latrine management – in target schools. The Activity will provide lectures on sexuality, 
prevention of HIV/AIDS and pregnancy including gender stereotypes to improve the health status 
of girls and boys. The activity will build the skills of school councils on issues of sexually 
transmitted diseases and pregnancy prevention to enable them to equip girls with soft skills to 
protect themselves from all forms of abuse. This will be done in close partnership and 
collaboration with school councils and community members, including local organizations 


working in education, health (DREAMS and Family Planning) and WASH (UNICEF) including 
community councils. 

At the secondary school, the Activity will revitalize youth and girls’ clubs to provide lectures and 
space for girls and boys to discuss their rights of health, exchange experiences to better manage 
menstruation and prevent early pregnancy and HIV/AIDS, in collaboration with district health 
units. Advancing Girls Education will build the capacity of teachers to deliver education messages 
aiming to improve gender bias, prevent SRGBV and early pregnancy, and promote healthy habits 
in school and household. The Activity will provide mentorship to community members to enable 
them to sensitize girls to adhere to contraceptive methods thus preventing unwanted pregnancy and 
sexually transmitted diseases. Through a community participatory approach, girls will be 
empowered to seek justice services to address SRGBV and other forms of abuse. 

 

Expected Results: 

● Increased opportunity for girls to access and benefit from WASH and Health services. 
● Established school-based health services linked with the DREAMs program and health 
workers at district level. 
● Increased access to sanitation services to widen adolescent girls’ opportunity to manage 
menstruation, preventing sexually transmitted diseases and early pregnancy. 
● Girls (and boys) have soft skills to seek justice services to claim for their rights. 


 

Component 4: increase safety of girls at school and household (Early marriage and pregnancy, 
sexual transmitted diseases and SRGBV). 

The Activity will promote the development of more educational community radio broadcasting 
key messages in local language to promote girls against violence in school and household. 
Community radios will raise gender equality and girls’ schooling and reduce GBV. Through 
community radios, the Activity will deliver messages to empower school councils and entire 
communities with soft skills to address gender dynamics and promote inclusion and more girls’ 
participation in aspects related to their rights. 

Expected results: 

● Increased capacity of community radios to broadcast key messages aiming to promote 
gender equality and reduce violence in schools and households in the local language. 
● Increased leadership skills of existing female teachers and school councils to promote 
community debates to monitor all forms of violence at household level. 
● Strengthened youth clubs in school and community to promote community debates on 
prevention of early marriage and pregnancy, gender-based violence and promotion of 
gender equality at all levels. 


 

6. Geographic focus 


 


The Activity is expected to be implemented in the provinces of Zambézia and Nampula. The 
criteria for determining the geographic focus included MINEDH’s strategic focus on promoting 
the gradual expansion of equitable access to education, prioritizing districts with lower learning 
indicators. The presence of other USAID/donor activities and of USAID-funded provincial 
advisors was also considered in determining the geographic focus of this activity. A landscape 
analysis of the donor ecosystem identified four major donors currently funding education activities 
across Mozambique. Major Donors include World Bank, UNICEF, ADRA (Agência Adventista de 
Desenvolvimento e Recursos Assistenciais) and World Vision. According to the analysis, USAID 
and UNICEF are presently the two donors supporting education and gender equality activities 
across Zambézia and Nampula. Therefore, the Awardee will need to ensure close coordination of 
activities to prevent any duplication of efforts. 

 

7. Beneficiaries 


 

The Activity is expected to improve the retention of girls ages 10-19 who are in school, pregnant 
and/or otherwise at risk of dropping out of school in Zambézia and Nampula provinces. 

 

8. Summary of Relevant USG and Donor Activities 


 

USAID has invested in promoting early grade reading through the Aprender a Ler and Vamos Ler! 
Programs as well as through partnerships with the Peace Corps and Mozambican NGOs, namely 
Eu Leio, UATAF-AFC (Associação de Fortalecimento Comunitário), and Ajuda de 
Desenvolvimento de Povo para Povo (ADPP).26 ADPP focuses particularly on closing the gender 
gap in primary and secondary school attendance by training teachers, school council members, and 
community leaders in gender-responsive pedagogy, gender-based violence prevention, child 
protection, and mentoring as well as through improving school infrastructure and addressing 
enabling social conditions.27 

26 USAID. Basic Education [Internet]. Maputo: USAID; 2018 [cited 2019 Apr 10]. Available from: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1869/Education_Sector_Briefer.pdf 

27 USAID. Basic Education [Internet]. Maputo: USAID; 2018 [cited 2019 Apr 10]. Available from: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1869/Education_Sector_Briefer.pdf 

● USAID’s Vamos Ler 
● USAID DREAMS 





 

USAID’s Vamos Ler activity is improving reading outcomes in primary education by using a 
bilingual instructional approach. With the Ministry of Education, Vamos Ler! is developing gender 
responsive curricula, teaching materials, classroom management and instructional approaches. 
Teacher training emphasizes gender equality and the importance of positive female role models for 
girls. Social awareness campaigns with parents and communities underscore the importance of 
girls’ learning and attending school and improving early grade reading outcomes in 1,950 schools 
in Nampula and Zambézia through teaching young children to read in local languages. 

 

 


● USAID Family Planning Activities 
● USAID Integrated Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) 





The USAID Determined, Resilient, Empowered, AIDS-free, Mentored and Safe (DREAMS) 
project objective is to improve diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
among Adolescent Girls and Young Women (AGYW) and their partners, scale up the focus on 
adolescent girls 9-14 year-old by implementing age appropriate and evidence-based HIV and 
violence prevention interventions and leveraging Orphans and Vulnerable Children program to 
expand the variety of services offered while maintaining a holistic package of services and 
approach for most vulnerable 15-24-year-old citizens to improving economic opportunities for 
AGYW. The project also strengthens government policies and strategies to ensure comprehensive 
HIV and violence prevention in schools. 

 

Through a community participatory approach, Advancing Girls Education will work closely with 
DREAMS and Family Planning Activities in Zambézia and Nampula to deliver lectures and 
behavior change messages on School Related GBV, prevention of sexually transmitted diseases, 
early pregnancy, and menstruation management. DREAMS will build the capacity of teachers to 
incorporate health messages in school subjects and health related communication material to 
increase retention, improve academic performance and safety for girls. All interventions will be 
coordinated with health officers/units at districts. 

 

 

The USAID Integrated Family Planning Project (IFPP), 2016-2021, Pathfinder Program increases 
the use of modern contraceptive methods through improved health services and reaches women 
with a high unmet need for family planning such as adolescents, women living with HIV, and 
postpartum women. The program purposefully engages men and boys to shift inequitable gender 
norms and behaviors around adolescent pregnancy, family size, and gender-based violence. The 
project is currently supporting counseling and provision of contraceptives at school levels. The 
Awardee is expected to build upon the success of IFPP to incorporate key messages to prevent 
early pregnancy among adolescent girls in Nampula and keep girls in schools by avoiding drop off 
due to pregnancies. Also, the awardee is expected to closely collaborate with IFPI activities at the 
community, health facility, district and provincial, and central levels, reinforcing key health and 
empowerment messages and linkages to quality health services, information, and care in Zambézia 
and Nampula. 

 

 

The USAID integrated Social Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) or Programa Inter-
Religioso Contra a Malária (PIRCOM), 2019-2024, aims to increase the reach, recall, and quality 
of priority health messages by developing an integrated health SBCC package, in which messages 
will be disseminated by faith leaders and community radios. Considering PIRCOM implements 
activities in Zambezia and Nampula, the Awardee will need to coordinate with PIRCOM and 
utilize relevant Information Education Communication (IEC) and Behavior Change 
Communication (BCC) materials developed by the SBCC project in all service delivery points at 
both school facilities and at the community level. The awardee is expected to closely collaborate 
with the USAID Communication for Improved Health Outcomes (CIHO), 2017-2022, to design 
and produce high-quality, evidence-based resources to promote healthy behavior and the use of 


health products and services at the national level. The awardee is expected to improve health 
communication systems and coordinate SBC interventions to benefit from CIHO-supported 
resources that will leverage the linkage among the school-based health communities with the 
health workers. 

 


● Donor Support to Girls and Women 
● Coordination 
● Relation to USAID/Mozambique CDCS 2020-2025 





 

The United Nations Population Fund (UNFP) Rapariga Biz project aims to transform secondary 
school girls into change agents in their communities in Nampula and Zambézia. UNICEF is also 
working in Zambézia and Nampula in planning, implementing, monitoring, and coordinating the 
educational regular intervention programs and support in the integration of gender issues in 
different education programs. Through the USAID-funded Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
in Health Facilities, 2018-2022, UNICEF will improve WASH infrastructure in approximately 70 
health facility settings across Nampula, Sofala and Zambezia, and develop small water systems in 
a few towns. As access to water is critical to improving health status and fostering school retention 
for girls, the Activity is expected to collaborate with UNICEF as appropriate. 

 

 

The Activity is expected to collaborate closely with USAID/Mozambique’s DREAMS, Integrated 
Family Planning Project (IFPP), Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC), and supply 
chain activities described above, as well as with activities of other major education donors working 
in the same districts and/or provinces. The Activity is also expected to seek opportunities for better 
coordination among GRM ministries – Ministry of Education, Ministry of Gender and Social 
Action – and other major donors implementing education and gender activities. Strong 
USAID/GRM/donor coordination may include joint annual work plan development with 
Implementing Partners in the target geographic areas; establishment of joint mechanisms for 
coordination and dialogue with relevant GRM institutions, civil society, and citizen stakeholders; 
and joint monitoring and evaluation planning and implementation. 

 

USAID/Mozambique’s CDCS 2020-2025 will contribute to efforts that result in Mozambique 
becoming resilient and prepared for the future. To this end, USAID will promote a peaceful, 
prosperous, and healthy Mozambique where citizens benefit from expanded investments. This 
Activity primarily contributes to Development Objective 1 (DO 1): Healthier and Better Education 
Mozambicans, Especially the Young and Vulnerable, and particularly to Intermediate Result 1.2: 
Utilization of Health and Education Services Expanded, Focusing on Youth and Gender. The 
Activity will strengthen the capacity of the GRM to deliver quality education services at the most 
basic and fundamental level in reading and numeracy skills, so that more students will enjoy 
academic success and be able to access higher levels of education to guarantee their future 
economic and social prosperity. 

 

A large body of evidence confirms that many Mozambicans go without health care and fail to 
attend school, despite availability of these services. The Activity is expected to tackle the demand 
side, by addressing the barriers that constrain use of schools. The Activity is expected to support 
increased utilization of education services, with a strong focus on reaching girls and incorporating 
gender considerations. The Activity is expected to work with communities to address social, 
cultural, and gender norms which hinder access to education, and with the GRM and other 
stakeholders to address additional barriers. Activities will engage communities to address gender 


● Lesson Learned in Girls’ Education 





and cultural barriers and stereotypes such as limiting domestic chores and looking after children 
but limiting female responsibility to decision making and financial management. 

 

 

Although there is a large body of research that describes the institutional and social barriers that 
impede girls’ education, there has been considerably less research on strategies to overcome those 
barriers. In 2013, USAID commissioned an American Institutes for Research end-line study of a 
similar girls’ education activity in Malawi. According to the study, strong leadership, parental 
buy-in, and cooperation from female students were all necessary conditions for success. Strong 
community leaders were particularly able to engage parents, who then could influence their 
children’s ability to attend and stay in school (instead of farming, for example). Community 
members did express concern about the unsustainability of donor-driven interventions and 
emphasized the importance of local, community-based leadership, rather than temporary, external 
solutions. The study found that the implementing partner should use local resources that promote 
sustainability. 

 

USAID/Mozambique funded the Nikhalamo Girls’ Education activity, form 2014-2020, 
implemented by the Ajuda de Desenvolvimento de Povo para Povo (ADPP), with the overall 
objective of improving educational quality, retention and completion for vulnerable girls in upper 
primary and lower secondary schools and provide them with skills to improve the quality of their 
lives. It also aimed to improve the learning conditions through a Community Block Grant, which 
exempted vulnerable girls from paying school fees and supported their enrollment and retention in 
secondary schools. The activity aimed to ensure community participation in girls’ education by 
holding community mothers responsible to oversee children in community pre-schools to enable 
young mothers to attend classes. School councils were responsible to monitor gender-based 
violence in school and ensure teachers implement gender sensitive teaching methodologies to 
improve girl’s performance, retention and transition. The Nikhalamo Mid-Term Evaluation 
Report28 identified four conditions that improved sustainability: (1) local people need to feel 
ownership of and be committed to the goals of the effort; (2) activities need to be lodged in 
existing country institutions; (3) personnel of the education institutions must have the skills and 
specialized knowledge to maintain the gender- sensitive education approach; and (4) adequate 
resources need to be available over a long enough period to support essential education activities. 

28 Nikhalamo - I am Here to Stay - Girls Education Activity. Mid-term Evaluation, available at: 

 

The report also states that large-scale education initiatives require a national commitment both to 
the goals and to the legitimizing structures (e.g., the finances, assigned responsibilities, and rules 
and procedures) needed to carry them out. An effective balance between national capacity to 
coordinate large-scale efforts and local capacity to ensure results at the community level is needed. 
Staff at all levels (national and local) need specialized gender sensitive pedagogy-oriented training 
to implement multi-sectoral approaches. In the long term, change is easier to sustain when 
effective routines are established in the institutions (education, health and social) expected to 
maintain the effort. The report ends by recommending that local and international networks 
develop an awareness of girls’ issues to the public and create a new sense that the gender gap in 


education is a national issue, not just a governmental or sectoral one. Efforts at the national level 
with local networks that reach into communities have the potential for greatly increasing girls’ 
participation in the future. 

The advancing Girls Education Activity will learn from the past experiences to invest more in 
girl’s education outcomes by improving access, retention and safety in school and reducing their 
vulnerability to premature pregnancy and/or otherwise dropping out of school. 

 

9. GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
● Gender Equality 





 

Gender equality and female empowerment is a core USAID Development Objective and is a 
mandatory consideration for all USAID programming per the USAID Gender Equality and Female 
Empowerment Policy. Gender inequality is prevalent in Mozambique and is often reinforced by 
tradition institutions, beliefs, and attitudes, (e.g., gender-based violence as a cultural norm) which 
in turn creates barriers of access to better education and sanitation services29. In Mozambique, with 
an overall literacy rate of 47%, female literacy (28%) lags far behind that of males (60%). The 
population is mostly young, with 46.6% of people between the ages of 0 and 14 years. The 
country suffers from high illiteracy rates for boys and girls, who also lack access to improved 
health and WASH services hindering all aspects of development. 

29 Education Sector Strategic Plan, 2020-2029. 

30 Systematic Country Diagnostic Report, 2016. 

31 Let Girls Learn, President Barack Obama Initiative. 

32 Soverano et al 2016, in Duarte &Dias (2016). 

 

Over 70% of women of reproductive age (and over 30% of men) in Nampula and Zambezia cannot 
read. UNICEF (2015) found that Zambezia and Nampula have the highest number of girls forced 
into adolescent unions. In these provinces, over 95,525 (Zambezia) and 129,604 (Nampula) girls 
married before the age of 18 respectively over the past few years. IBIS (2015) found that 
parents/guardians are more willing to finance the costs associated with initiation rites than to invest 
in education. A World Bank study of 201630 revealed that, in the provinces of Zambézia and 
Nampula, the main constraint was the cost of school supplies. Families must be able to afford and 
be willing to pay school fees to provide education to young girls and boys. However, girls’ risks 
long dangerous walks to school31. 

 

Despite the policy of free primary education, economic vulnerability remains an important factor 
that has been affecting education, particularly to girls32. Advancing Girls Education responds to the 
growing body of evidence that education affects every aspect of human growth and development. 
The interventions proposed under Advancing Girls Education will be based on a gender lens that 
demonstrate gender-transformative and sensitive approaches at the individual, community, 
structural, social, and political levels. Interventions should support implementation of activities 
focusing on increasing retention of girls ages 10-19 who are in school, pregnant or otherwise 
vulnerable or at risk of dropping out of school. The Awardee is expected to conduct a gender 


● Positive Youth Engagement 
● Coordination 





analysis providing a gender overview of the geographic area in which the project will be 
implemented and how the program will identify and address gender gaps. 

 

USAID is committed to ensuring the integration of youth considerations into its activities. Youth 
is a cross-cutting issue identified in the USAID/Mozambique’s CDCS, and youth is a key focus 
group of the Mission. To advance USAID/Mozambique’s focus on youth programming, 
adolescents and youth are priority populations to be reached and engaged by this activity. This 
goes beyond targeting for service delivery and should include active and meaningful engagement 
of adolescents and youth in planning and monitoring of access and retention to education and 
sanitation services. To achieve these objectives, this activity will be rooted in a Positive Youth 
Development (PYD) approach, which is based on the belief that, “given guidance and support 
from caring adults, all youth (ages 10-29) can grow up healthy and productive, making positive 
contributions to their families, schools, and communities.” 

 

This activity should intentionally focus on developing competencies and behaviors that support 
pro-social attitudes, a clear and positive personal identity, and positive belief in the future. 
Interventions should encourage youth leadership and experiential learning, as well as adult 
approachability and champions. Services and opportunities should be designed to support young 
people in developing a sense of competence, usefulness, belonging and empowerment. Activity is 
expected to include concrete and practical approaches that will not only address the challenges that 
youth face to access and remain in school and accomplish the academic activity results but will 
also involve and support young people in the decision-making, management and leadership of this 
activity including implementation of best practices resulting from this activity. 

 

Synergies will be created across sectors to support a comprehensive approach to delivering 
adolescent health results including programs on ending child marriage, promoting secondary 
education, HIV and other sexual transmitted diseases. At the inception of this agreement, the 
Awardee should develop a Youth Action Plan, reflective of USAID’s Youth in Development 
Policy, to ensure that appropriate strategies and approaches are used that meaningfully and 
promptly engage adolescents and youth in the primary activity goal of improving retention of girls 
in school. The Activity will provide a systematic monitoring of gender and youth integration, 
evaluation, and learning plan. The Activity is expected to maximize the existing youth clubs and 
strengths, and experience of its diverse partners, to reduce gender barriers and social norms 
hindering education for girls. Youth clubs will also provide a space for young people to participate 
meaningfully in all its activities and particularly in the co-creation and implementation of 
sustainable solutions to increase retention of girls in school. Awardees are expected to conduct an 
independent youth analysis and demonstrate youth-specific program planning (and accompanying 
MEL planning). 

 

The Activity will coordinate with the Ministry of Education to contribute to the Education Sector 
Strategic Plan (2020-2029) and strategic objectives in the Government of Mozambique (GRM) 5 
year strategy (2020 – 2024) to (1) ensure inclusion and equity in access, participation and retention 


● Private Sector Engagement 
● Self-reliance and Sustainability 
● Climate Change and Risk Management 





and quality learning; (2) contribute to the elimination of harmful practices that violate the rights of 
women, men, girls and boys; and (3) promote equal rights and opportunities for girls and boys to 
increase school retention. In collaboration with the USAID health sector, the Activity is expected 
to (1) promote and support programs and initiatives that contribute to expanding access to social 
services such as health, WASH and justice. The activity will coordinate with AEB and UNICEF to 
improve access to and use of improved and quality sanitation services. Advancing Girls Education 
will collaborate with SBCC Activity to broadcast educational messages aiming to raise community 
awareness on the importance of education for girls. 

 

USAID recognizes the value of engaging the private sector in development and humanitarian 
assistance to help shape solutions that achieve sustained impact. The private sector is both an 
indirect beneficiary to and a partner for AGE interventions. Ultimately, AGE efforts to build 
capacities and relationships among public sector and private sector institutions are intended to 
improve the functioning of public sector actors. Therefore, robust engagement with the private 
sector is vital during the planning, implementation, and evaluation of AGE interventions. 

 

 

Systems strengthening and capacity development are the foundations of self-reliance and 
sustainability. The GRM is using a system-based approach by mandating key ministries to address 
education and gender equality while ensuring alignment of resources and actions towards 
achieving quality education. Country leadership and ownership are among the main drivers of 
sustainability and Advancing Girls Education must work closely with the GRM (at the National, 
Provincial, District, and Community levels), donors, civil society, the private sector, and other 
partners to support country ownership. The Advancing Girls Education Activity will help develop 
long-term country capacity to plan, manage and evaluate high-impact education and health 
programs. This will involve using a systems approach; ensuring close alliances with the GRM; 
fully engaging civil society to ensure that education and health services meet the needs of the 
people; and where possible, expanding involvement of the private academic and research 
institutions, and not-for-profit private sector institutions, including professional associations, 
NGOs, faith-based organizations, and community-based organizations (CBOs). To align annual 
work plans with those of the province and districts, Advancing Girls Education will participate in 
annual performance reviews and planning meetings with the MINEDH and other relevant GRM 
entities such as the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Action. Advancing Girls Education will 
consistently ensure that activities are coordinated with the GRM, donors, NGOs, civil society, and 
the private sector, as necessary. Advancing Girls Education will also discuss and draft plans, when 
relevant, with the GRM and other partners, to plan for transition and/or phasing out of certain 
interventions when the GRM has identified resources to assume responsibility for specific 
activities and/or at end of project. 

 

 


● Environmental Compliance 
● Collaboration, Learning and Adapting 





USAID supports strengthening development outcomes by integrating climate change into Agency 
programming, learning, policy dialogues and operations. The Automated Directives System (ADS) 
201 requires climate risk assessment and management for all new projects and activities across 
sectors to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of project and activity objectives in the face of 
extreme weather and climate events. 

 

Per ADS 201 and the climate risk screening process detailed in the mission’s approved CDCS, 
climate risk analysis has been conducted for the AGE Activity. The analysis established that 
climate risks are moderate to high for Development Objective 1: Healthier and Better Educated 
Mozambicans, Especially the Young and Vulnerable, for all the planned interventions. Per ADS 
201 and the climate risk screening process detailed in the mission’s approved CDCS, Mozambique 
is ranked 154 (out of 181), making it one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change. 
Mozambique is extremely exposed to flooding, cyclones, and droughts, has almost 2,500 km of 
coastlines with many people living in, and moving to, areas exposed to sea level rise and storm 
surge, approximately 80% of the population rely on small scale farming, and especially climate 
sensitive sector, and many of Mozambique’s institutions are not equipped to prepare or respond to 
extreme weather events and future slow onset climate change. This was highlighted by Cyclone 
Idai in 2019, which devastated much of central Mozambique. The primary impacts of Cyclone Idai 
were intense, such as the immediate loss of life and property. In addition, due to the lack of 
preparedness, the secondary impacts, such as outbreaks of infectious diseases, were also 
significant. All sectors in Mozambique are sensitive to climate change. Understanding how those 
sectors are sensitive, and how USAID programs are integrating climate integration, will improve 
USAID investments in, and partnerships with Mozambique. Both the health and the agriculture 
sector are highly vulnerable to climate change in Mozambique. For many of the high or moderate 
risks identified, climate risks should be considered during project implementation, this may 
include adding language to work plans on climate risks. 

 

 

All USAID funded activities must comply with 22 CFR 216. USAID has recommended A 

CATEGORICAL EXCLUSION for the proposed AGE Activity, which includes training, technical 
assistance, studies, workshops, information transfers, printed materials and design-related activities 
not directly affecting and providing institutional capacity building technical assistance that 
improve execution of institutional functions, budgeting, planning and implementation and 
enforcement of policies, as well and systems strengthening technical assistance that includes 
developing stronger vertical and horizontal institutional linkages to improve relationships. This 
indicates that these activities are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the environment. 
Pursuant to 22 CFR 216.3, if additional interventions not described in the Initial Environment 
Examination are added to this activity, then amended or new environmental documentation must 
be prepared and approved prior to implementation of those additional activities. As required by 
ADS 204.3.4, the education team will actively monitor ongoing activities for compliance with 
these recommendations. 

 

 


Development work presents many opportunities to collaborate and engage with a broad set of 

stakeholders to learn from both evidence and experience and adapt iteratively to unexpected results 
or context changes. Therefore, USAID places “Collaborating, Learning and Adapting” at the 
center of its Program Cycle, both as a connector between, and an integrated part of the 
components. 

 

Approaches that incorporate learning and adapting will be critical to the success of the Activity, 
and the Awardee must build adaptive learning into program implementation. Driving and 
monitoring the Activity’s effectiveness will require the Awardees' careful consideration of what 
types of short, focused studies and methods for providing rapid program feedback would be 
suitable and provide evidence for making program course corrections and decisions. These types 
of action-learning, monitoring and program reflection methods used to measure program 
effectiveness in complex implementation environments, are now well documented. They include 
participatory methods such as stakeholder feedback and network analysis that can reveal 
informational flows and relational dynamics of ‘who decides and who benefits’ and make program 
adjustments based on responsive program feedback that can foster more practical, problem-driven 
iterative adaptation. 

 

 

● Collaboration enables sector integration, convergence, and effective interventions to 
maximize development resources and enhance development results. The Awardee will 
collaborate with USAID supported activities and engage with stakeholders (defined 
collaboratively with USAID AOR) to facilitate delivery of integrated services to achieve 
the activity’s outcomes. 


 

● Learning is intentional, systematic, and resourced. Sources for learning include data 
from monitoring, portfolio reviews, findings of research, evaluations, analyses conducted 



by USAID or third parties, knowledge gained from experience, stocktaking exercises, and 
from other sources. The documents produced by USAID will be shared with the Awardee 
by the AOR for consideration in the learning phase of CLA. 


These sources will be used to develop and implement plans, be used in adaptive management, 
and contribute to the USAID/Mozambique knowledge base in order to improve development 
outcomes. A collaborating, learning, and adapting focus helps to ensure that programming is 
coordinated, grounded in evidence, and adjusted as necessary to remain relevant and effective 
throughout implementation. 

Knowledge generated by learning will be applied throughout programming to 
implementation approaches, processes, and stakeholder engagement. Knowledge generated by 
learning should also be disseminated to the Activity stakeholders, partners, and collaborators in 
appropriate format (i.e. learning questions, reports on the Activity’s findings etc.) so that it may 
be translated into decisions and actions that enhance the success of approaches and interventions 
designed to achieve common intermediate results. 

The Awardee will share information and knowledge generated by monitoring data, portfolio 
review results, research findings, evaluations, analyses, and experiences with other USAID 
implementing partners and other Development Partners. The Awardee will apply actionable 
information and knowledge gained from collaborating partners from activity implementation to 
improve results. USAID implementing partners will convene on a periodic basis to reflect on 
actions taken, exchange analysis, and propose decisions that affect implementation. 

● Adapting: The Awardee will demonstrate adaptability that is informed by knowledge 
gained through learning and recognize behaviors and incentives necessary to create 
change. Knowledge gained through learning will influence decision making, resource 
allocation, and adaptation to contextual shifts. Application of new knowledge to 
implementation decisions will be reflected in the Annual Work Plan and Activity 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan. Decisions to adapt may be based on but not 
limited to, the following: 
⮚ Extraneous changes in the operating environment (i.e., emergency, or natural disaster; 
national policy changes) 
⮚ Financial and human resource constraints 


⮚ Evidence that signals targets are unmet 

⮚ Emerging evidence that interventions are not working or could work better if adapted 

Any changes to the scope of the agreement must be approved by the Cognizant Agreement Officer 
in a modification to the agreement. 

 

A rigorous learning agenda that uses innovative approaches to monitor, evaluate, document, 
disseminate, and efficiently apply lessons learned is pivotal to the successful scale up of multi-
sectoral education and health programming in Mozambique. The CLA agenda prioritizes 
implementation research and approaches so that learning is incorporated into every aspect of 


education and health programming and implementation - from activity design, to service delivery, 
to utilization/uptake, and adherence. Systematic research and efficient processes for translating 
lessons learned into practice are essential for resolving the continuous challenges of implementing 
and scaling up education interventions. 

 

The CLA approach is based on the understanding that development efforts yield more effective 
results if they are coordinated and collaborative, test promising, new approaches in a continuous 
yet also rapid, targeted search for generating improvements and efficiencies, and build on what 
works and eliminate what does not. Advancing Girls Education will adopt the USAID’s 
collaborating, learning, and adapting (CLA) approach. The project will create pauses for reflection 
in the activity implementation scheme to enable the people involved to stop, reflect, identify 
problems, and think of alternative solutions. This will be done through planning and review 
meetings that will aim to analyze the current situation (challenges, bottlenecks, solutions, best 
practices, and lessons learned) and incorporate conclusions in the plans for the following 
implementation period. The suggestion is to conduct review meetings with implementation teams 
and other stakeholders – ZIPs (Zone of Educational Influence), SDEJT (Serviço Distrital de 
Educação, Juventude e Tecnologia), District Health Services, MGCAS (Ministério do Gênero, 
Criança e Acção Social), MINEDH (Ministério da Educação e Desenvolvimento Humano) and 
other USG partners in the target area. Community dialogues and key information exchange or 
feedback of beneficiaries on what works and what does not and why, in relation to girl’s education 
will lead to an effective implementation. UNICEF has been programming with and for adolescents 
for many years, addressing adolescent development largely through education; HIV prevention and 
treatment; nutrition; water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH); and social and child protection33. The 
Awardee is encouraged to partner with other donors and create a window of opportunity to 
influence developmental trajectories (including growth and cognitive development) and contribute 
to an equal education opportunity for adolescent girls and boys. 

33 UNICEF Program Guidance for the Second Decade: Programming with and for Adolescents. Program division, 
2018. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to make one cooperative agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID 
intends to provide approximately $10,000,000 (Ten million dollars) in total USAID funding. 

 

2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 


Performance Monitoring and Evaluation 

Institutional and systems strengthening activities contribute to improved economic and social 
outcomes through various complex pathways that are both interconnected and independent. Given 
this complexity, innovative approaches to monitoring and evaluation need to be used to capture 
changes for learning and refinement of Activity interventions and performance and ensure that the 
Activity goals are met. 

The awardee must conduct performance monitoring of the activity. Performance monitoring is the 
ongoing and systematic collection of performance indicator data and other quantitative or 
qualitative information to reveal whether implementation is on track and whether expected results 
are being achieved. The Awardee must analyze performance monitoring data to inform judgments 
about the outputs and outcomes of the activity as a basis to improve effectiveness and/or inform 
decisions about current and future programming. One way the Mission will analyze performance is 
by comparing actual results achieved against the expected results and targets initially set at the 
beginning of implementation. This analysis is critical in determining the progress made in 
achieving the expected results identified in the activity’s results framework and/or logic model. 

USAID/Mozambique recognizes that the success of the Activity will depend on the contributions 
of actors directly and indirectly engaged with the Activity, as well as institutions and processes 
beyond the manageable interests of the Awardee. While some of the Activity’s interventions may 
on their own be sufficient to result in a change in practice or behavior at the individual or 
institutional level, other interventions may be necessary but not by themselves be sufficient to 
effect the desired change. The Awardee should make all efforts to understand and articulate the 
way its intervention contributes to a results pathway and define all the relevant contributors to a 
results pathway, even if they are outside its direct control.The applicant will develop a monitoring 
plan that permits the efficient and timely measurement of progress towards outcome and output 
indicators for each result and sub-result. USAID will require the applicant to align indicators with 
the USAID reading mandatory Department of State “F indicators” listed below. The applicant will 
provide sex-disaggregated reporting on the following indicators: 

● Number of learners in primary schools or equivalent non-school based settings reached 
with USG education assistance. 



● Number of learners in secondary schools or equivalent non-school based settings reached 
with USG education assistance. 
● Number of parent teacher associations (PTAs) or community-based school governance 
structures engaged in primary or secondary education supported with USG assistance. 
● Number of public and private schools receiving USG assistance. 
● Number of learning environments supported by USG assistance that have improved safety, 
according to locally-defined criteria. 


The following are USAID FACTS Info indicators that measure achievement of the Intermediate 
Results: 

● Number of PTAs or similar school governance structures supported; and 
● Number of laws, policies, regulations, or guidelines developed or modified to reduce girl’s 
abandonment. 
● Percent of individuals with improved quality of employment following participation in 
USG-assisted workforce development programs 
● Percent of learners regularly participating in distance learning programming funded with 
USG education assistance 
● Number of people reached by a USG funded intervention providing GBV services (e.g., 
health, legal, psycho-social counseling, shelters, hotlines, other) 
● Number of persons trained with USG assistance to advance outcomes consistent with 
gender equality or female empowerment through their roles in public or private sector 
institutions or organizations 
● Percentage of participants reporting increased agreement with the concept that males and 
females should have equal access to social, economic, and political resources and 
opportunities 


The following (or adaptations of the following) are additional custom indicators: 

● Number and % of early primary and secondary school teachers successfully implementing 
retention and safety interventions for girls. 
● Percent of schools with girls and boys staying in school above 80%. 
● Number of provincial and district authorities, cluster (ZIP) coordinators, principals, and 
pedagogical directors supporting teachers in the delivery of school-based evidence support 
to girls. 
● Number of parents engaging with students to improve school retention; and 
● Percent of communities monitoring students’ retention and holding schools accountable for 
using gender sensitive approach and promoting safety in schools. 


The following are custom indicators utilized by the MINEDH and FASE (Fundo de Apoio ao 
Sector de Educação) to measure school progress: 

● Seventh grade retention (survival) rate (in USAID supported schools); and 
● Student/teacher ratio in grade 7 and 8 (in USAID supported schools). 



The applicant will provide sex-disaggregated reporting on the following Health and WASH “F 
indicators”: 

● Percent of USG-assisted service delivery sites providing family planning (FP) counseling 
and/or services. 
● Number of USG-assisted community health workers (CHWs) providing Family Planning 
(FP) information, referrals, and/or services during the year. 
● Number of people gaining access to a basic sanitation service as a result of USG 
assistance. 


 

3. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date will be upon 
the signature of the award, on or about, or other effective date determined by the Agreement 
Officer. 

 

4. Substantial Involvement 


 

a. Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 


The Recipient shall obtain the Agreement Officer’s written approval for its 
implementation plan. The implementation plan includes the following: annual work 
plans, subawards, required reports, MEL plan, and knowledge management plans. 
Any change to the activity description or the approved budget requires Agreement 
Officer’s approval. If at the time of award, the program description does not 
establish a timeline in sufficient detail for the planned achievement of milestones or 
outputs, USAID may delay approval of the recipient’s implementation plan for a 
later date. USAID must not require approval of implementation plans more often 
than annually. If the AO has delegated authority to the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) to approve implementation plans, the AOR must review the 
agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure that changes to the terms and conditions 
are not inadvertently approved by the AOR. 

 

b. Approval of Specified Key Personnel 


All Key Personnel shall be employees of the prime recipient, not a sub-recipient. 
Before removing, replacing or diverting responsibilities from any of the listed or 
specified Key Personnel, the Recipient shall 1) notify the Agreement Officer 
reasonably in advance and 2) submit justification, including proposed substitutions 
in sufficient detail to permit evaluation of the individual and the impact on this 
agreement. Unless specified in writing by the Agreement Officer, no replacement of 
Key Personnel shall be made by the Recipient without the written approval of the 
Agreement Officer. 

 


c. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 


 

When the recipient's successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 
USAID's technical knowledge, the AO may authorize the collaboration or joint 
participation of USAID and the recipient on the program. There should be sufficient reason 
for Agency involvement and the involvement should be specifically tailored to support 
identified elements in the program description. When these conditions are met, the AO 
may include appropriate levels of substantial involvement such as the following: 

 

(1) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the 
program will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the 
recipient. USAID may participate as a member of this committee as well. 
Advisory committees must only deal with programmatic or technical issues and 
not routine administrative matters. 
(2) Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards. 2 CFR 200.308 
already requires the recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the subaward, 
transfer, or contracting out of any work under an award. This is generally 
limited to approving work by a third party under the agreement. If USAID 
wishes to reserve any further approval rights for sub-awards or contracts, it must 
clearly spell out such Agency involvement in the substantial involvement 
provision of the agreement. 
(3) Approval of the recipient's monitoring and evaluation plans. 
(4) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the 
program description, negotiated in the budget, and made a part of the award. 


 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 


 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 935 
(any area or country including the recipient country but excluding any country that is a 
prohibited source). 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Advancing Girls 
Education (AGE) Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will 
be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. 
The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent 
with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Eligibility for this RFA is restricted to Local Entities as defined below. 

 

For the purpose of this section, local entity means an individual, a corporation, a nonprofit 
organization, or another body of persons that: 

 

(5) is legally organized under the laws of; 
(6) has as its principal place of business or operations in; 
(7) is majority owned by individuals who are citizens or lawful permanent residents of; and 
(8) managed by a governing body, the majority of who are citizens or lawful permanent 
residents of a country receiving assistance from funds appropriated under title III of this 
Act. (c) 


 

For purposes of this section, “majority-owned’ and “-managed by” include, without limitation, 
beneficiary interests and the power, either directly or indirectly, whether exercisable, to control 
the election, appointment, or tenure of the organization's managers or a majority of the 
organization's governing body by any means. 

 

These eligibility requirements apply to only the principal Applicant. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 


 

There is no cost sharing requirement for the recipient of the award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Points of Contact 

Judite Caetano 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Mozambique 

E-Mail: jcaetano@usaid.gov 

 

2. Questions and Answers 

All questions regarding this RFA should be submitted to Judite Caetano, jcaetano@usaid.gov 
with a cc copy to jbadiane@usaid.gov no later than the date and time indicated on the cover 
letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this RFA will 
be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this RFA, if that 
information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any 
other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. Content and Form of Application Submission 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this RFA. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: The Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the Application. Please see 
subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and Business 
(Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only while the 
Business (Cost) Application must present the costs and explain the basis of estimation and other 
related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application 


 

● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 
alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone number 
and email address) 


 

● Program name 


 

● Notice of Funding Opportunity number /RFA number 


 

● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the organizations 
are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 303). 



 

Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied by evidence of 
that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to 
USAID/Mozambique. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations 


 

● Written in English 


 

● 12 font size, Times New Roman Font, single spaced, typed in standard 8.5 x 11 paper 
size with one-inch margins both right and left and each page numbered consecutively, 
date of submission, and Applicant’s name 


 

● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 
12-point Times New Roman requirement 


 

● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel 


 

● The technical application must be searchable in Word or PDF format as appropriate 


 

● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the Applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand and comply with all aspects of this RFA. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation 
of delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 


Electronic (e-mail) is the media for submitting the application. Please submit application to 
Judite Caetano at jcaetano@usaid.go with a cc copy to jbadiane@usaid.gov . 

 

Email submissions must include the RFA number and applicant’s name in the subject line 
heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also 
indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of 
the emails and their attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is 
being sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that states:"[RFA number], 
[Applicant Organization Name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application submitted as single 
and separate email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending them and the cost application submitted as a 
single excel budget with a separate attachment for the budget narrative in MS word or PDF. If 
this is not possible, please provide instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will 
not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided 
or are unclear. The application, if submitted by the submission deadline, will be reviewed for 
responsiveness to the RFA and the application format. No additions or modifications will be 
accepted after the submission date. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email that it is a 
"corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless there has been a 
change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this RFA, the initial point of entry to the 
government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Mozambique/OAA 
cannot guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 8MB per 
email. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

The Technical Application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The 
Application must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving 
the goals of this program. The Application should take into account the requirements of the 
program and merit review criteria found in this RFA. 

 

The Technical Application narrative section must not exceed 25 single-spaced typed pages. 

 


To facilitate the competitive review of the applications, USAID will consider only applications 
conforming to the prescribed format and page limitations. Any other information submitted will 
not be provided to the Selection Committee and will not be reviewed. Letters of support are not 
requested and will not be provided to the Selection Committee. 

 

The following will be counted as part of the 25-page limitation: 

− Executive Summary 
− Technical Excellence 
− Management Approach; and 
− Institutional Capacity 


 

The following will NOT be counted as part of the 25-page limitation: 

− Title Page (not counted against the page limit); 
− Cover Page (not counted against the page limit); 
− Table of Contents (not counted against the page limit). 
− Annexes (not counted against the page limit) 


 

Annexes: Annexes to the Technical Application should be provided as part of the technical 
submission. Promotional literature and materials regarding the applicant must not be submitted 
as part of the annexes. The following items submitted as an annex are not subject to the 25-page 
limitation and will not be counted. 

− Relevant Tables, Charts and Graphs 
− Resumes/Curriculum Vitaes for Key Personnel and long-term professional staff, 
proposed position descriptions and signed letters of commitment from Key Personnel, no 
more than three (3) pages in length 
− Partner letters of commitment, maximum 1-2 pages 
− Charts providing information on management structure, matrixes demonstrating staff 
skills, and organizational chart(s) 
− First Year draft Work Plan, and 
− Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan. 


 

All other items not listed above and provided as an annex will count towards the page limitation. 
Please number pages as “Page x of xx Pages” where a page number combined with a letter 
indicates a page that is exempt from the 25-page limitation. 

 

Annexes can be numbered separately and should be numbered as “Annex 1: 1 of X, Annex 

2: 2 of X”, etcetera. Pages should be numbered at the bottom. 

 

The Technical Application should confirm or propose modifications to the objectives, activities 
and indicators described in the Program Description. It should also contain a description of key 
strategies, activities and approaches, as well as the synergies among them that the proposed 
partner will pursue in order to accomplish the desired results described in this Activity 
Description, as well as the rationale for selecting them. Gender and youth issues should also be 
addressed. Interested applicants must provide a detailed technical application and demonstrate 
how it will achieve the overall goal, program objectives and results as previously described. 


 

The Technical Application will be the most important part of consideration in selection for award 
of the proposed activity. It must take into account and be arranged in the order of the merit 
review criteria found in Section E—for ease of reviewing by the Selection Committee (SC): 

 

Title Page: The Applicant must include the following basic information in the title page: 
Proposed project title; NOFO/RFA number; Name of organization(s) submitting the application; 
Address of organization(s) submitting the application; Point of contact (POC) at organization; 
and POC’s title, telephone number, and email address. 

 

Cover Page: Describe the names of the organizations/institutions involved in the proposed 
application. In the case of a group, please indicate the lead or primary applicant clearly; followed 
by any proposed sub-grantees and/or contractors (hereafter referred to as “subs”), including a 
brief narrative describing the unique capacities/skills being brought to the program by each 
institution. A summary table should be included that lists the Prime Applicant and all partner 
organizations as well as the percentage of overall program activities that each partner will 
contribute. The Cover Page must be signed by the organization’s official with authority to 
negotiate/sign on such an application with USAID. 

 

Table of Contents: The Table of Contents should list all parts of the technical application, with 
page numbers and attachments. 

 

Executive Summary: A two- page, brief description of proposed activities, goals, and 
anticipated results (both quantitative and qualitative). Briefly describe technical and managerial 
resources of your organization. Describe how the overall program will be managed. State the 
bottom- line funding request from USAID and the bottom- line funding secured from other 
sources (state sources and amounts) for the proposed Activity. The Executive Summary shall 
summarize the key elements of the applicant’s technical application. 

 

Program Description: The Technical Application Narrative as revised during negotiations will 
become the Program Description of any resulting Cooperative Agreement. It must include a clear 
description of the conceptual approach and the general strategy (i.e. methodology and 
techniques) being proposed. It must outline specific, focused activities; identify how and where 
(e.g. geographic locations and level: local, district, province, etc.) those activities will be 
implemented; explain how the approach is expected to achieve the proposed objectives; and 
describe a plan that will enable the activities to continue after the Activity has been completed. 

 

In developing the application, Applicants are expected to take the RFA Program Description 
technical guidance into account. Applicants should demonstrate that they have researched other 
USG, GOM and donor activities in the region on which they are bidding and suggest solutions to 
ensure continuity of service and meet known gaps. The Applicant must articulate which key 
public and private sector stakeholders it intends to coordinate and engage with to advance the 
project’s goal and objective, to amplify the funding and/or contributions and to achieve a scale 
that would not be possible only through USAID funds. The Applicant must also explain why 
those stakeholders are vital to the approach. The Applicant must identify its existing relationship 


or work history with those organizations. Applicants must describe how they will coordinate and 
engage with the stakeholders, especially USG clinical partners and PEPFAR initiatives, to ensure 
ownership, maximize synergy and resources, minimize overlap, and achieve the project’s goal 
and objective. 

 

6. Technical Application Considerations 

a) Technical Approach 


USAID requires the Applicant to collaborate with USAID’s three existing activities DREAMS, 
Integrated Family Planning Project (IFPP), Social and Behavior Change Communication 
(SBCC) and GRM ministries – Ministry of Education, Ministry of Gender and Social Action – 
and other major donors implementing education and gender activities. In the Technical Approach 
section of the narrative, Applicants must describe how they will work collaboratively with other 
USAID activities, donors and the GRM to achieve the goal, objectives and outcomes identified 
for the Program. Applications must also describe anticipated activities and results of proposed 
collaborative development activities and explain how these results will contribute to the 
Program’s objectives. Although Applicants must respond to the program description outlined 
above, they are encouraged to draw from their expertise and knowledge to propose additional 
outputs and associated activities through which the program objectives and outcomes will be 
achieved. USAID expects the activities, plans, outputs and outcomes of this project to be an 
integral part of public schools and the GRM’s strategy of school-based reform in local 
communities to improve student retention and create access to education for girls and improve 
their learning environment. Applicants must show how they intend to ensure that level of project 
ownership by schools and MINDEH, as applicable. Applications also must include a plan for 
sustainability that identifies strategies for and activities to support the goal and objectives 
developed through the Program beyond the duration of the project. 

b) Implementation Approach 

The Applicant must include all factors it deems important for the project’s success. The 
implementation approach must discuss the Applicant’s plan to carry out proposed activities in a 
logical sequence of events that will allow the Program to progress toward producing required 
results over the life of the project. Applicants must describe in some depth how the Activity will 
promote girls-centered education by promoting community participation and accountability to 
reduce barriers of education for girls such as harmful social norms, stereotypes and SRGBV, 
including engagement of girls and boys throughout the implementation, as well as how 
collaboration among all entities will help schools and district offices use a gender sensitive and 
transformational approach and increase gender equity in education and health programs and 
services. Applicants must plan to allocate adequate resources and time to monitoring and 
evaluation including performance management and assessment. 

c) Work Plan 


 The implementation approach must include a draft work plan that provides a proposed list of 
program activities and an implementation schedule. Applicants must provide a timeline, Gantt 
chart, or other graphic that depicts more detailed activities in Year One in sufficient detail to 
portray the Applicant’s implementation goals and processes. 

d) Organizational Capability and Management Plan: Applicants must provide a clear 
description of their internal capabilities/resources and relevant work experience/history to 
demonstrate the capacity to successfully manage the proposed project to include: 

● An explanation of the core technical capacities/resources and institutional support that 
the Applicant offers and explain the Applicant’s financial control system. 
● A brief description of the Applicant’s areas of expertise and particular capacities in 
implementing the requirements of this NOFO. 


The Applicant must describe the organizational capabilities and expertise of any proposed sub-
Recipients, if applicable. 

e) Illustrative Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 

The Applicant must propose a Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan with clear 
performance monitoring indicators, data and other quantitative and qualitative information to 
reveal whether implementation is on track and whether expected results are being achieved. The 
Awardee must analyze performance monitoring data to inform judgments about the outputs and 
outcomes of the activity as a basis to improve effectiveness and/or inform decisions about current 
and future programming. One way the Mission will analyze performance is by comparing actual 
results achieved against the expected results and targets initially set at the beginning of 
implementation. This analysis is critical in determining the progress made in achieving the 
expected results identified in the activity’s results framework and/or logic model. The applicant 
will develop a monitoring plan that permits the efficient and timely measurement of progress 
towards outcome and output indicators for each result and sub-result. USAID will require the 
applicant to align indicators with the USAID reading mandatory Department of State “F 
indicators” listed in section “B”. 

Expertise of Key Personnel: Key personnel are those personnel whose professional and technical 
skills are essential to the successful completion of the activities. Key personnel fill positions 
deemed essential for the successful implementation of the award and must have the relevant 
technical and managerial experience required for the position. Applicants must identify and 
describe credentials and experience of Key Personnel responsible for technical leadership 
including subject matter expertise (i.e. education, health WASH) ; administrative management, 
monitoring and evaluation; and financial management of the award. 


Personnel Requirements 

The Applicant must propose to recruit and maintain a team of technical experts and supporting 
staff to implement the Program described in this program description and manage its range of 
activities and services. This may include staffing arrangements that are necessary to achieve the 
desired results. USAID considers collaboration with the recipient crucial for the successful 
implementation of the Program. Applicants should propose technical personnel and other 
personnel, as deemed appropriate, to implement the activities above. The Key Personnel listed 
below are considered essential to the work being performed due to their skills and position 
within the AGE project implementation team. 

Chief of Party: 

The Chief of Party (COP) is responsible for the overall overall leadership, management and 
implementation of the Program and reports directly to the designated USAID Agreements 
Officer’s Representative (AOR). S/he must supervise project implementation, serve as the 
principle interlocutor with USAID and the GRM, and ensure the project meets stated goals and 
reporting requirements. The Chief of Party must meet the following minimum set of 
qualifications: 

● The Chief of Party shall have a master’s degree in Public Policy, Education, 
Administration, International Development or a relevant field from an internationally 
recognized university; 
● A minimum of ten years of professional experience in the successful implementation of 
education and/or human and institutional capacity development programs; 
● Proven leadership in the administration of similar sized international donor technical 
assistance projects, or universities and technical colleges with skills in strategic planning, 
management, supervision and budgeting. 


Deputy Chief of Party : 

The Deputy Chief of Party must complement the experience, strengths and responsibilities of the 
Chief of Party. The Deputy Chief of Party is responsible for day-to-day project management, 
including management of staff, activities and sub-awards and oversight of monitoring, evaluation 
and reporting. 

The Deputy Chief of Party must meet the following minimum set of qualifications: 

● A master’s degree in Education or other relevant field from an internationally recognized 
university; 



● A minimum of 10 years of progressively more responsible experience managing complex 
educational development projects, preferably in the field of education reform and girls 
education; and 
● Ability to participate in all representation and technical meetings in English and 
Portuguese. 


 

Note: USAID requires that between the above two positions the following skills/experience are 
present: 

● Significant experience in education, particularly helping girls preferred; 
● Significant experience in teacher education, both at pre-service and in-service levels; 
● Significant experience in educational policy and systemic reform; 
● Thorough knowledge of the education system in Mozambique; 
● Experience in working with local governments and institutions; 
● Experience in overseeing the Activity’s monitoring and evaluation, finances and 
operations; and 
● Fluency in English and Portuguese. 


 

Technical Components Managers 

The two proposed Managers for Technical components that will ensure improved Girls’ 
Retention, and Performance in Upper Primary and Secondary Schools in target districts and 
increase Girls’ access to key social services such as Health and WASH should work in 
collaboration with the COP and/or the DCOP, to coordinate all activities with technical approach 
related to improve the quality of teaching, with emphasis on the gender-sensitivity of teaching 
that will lead to better learning outcomes for girls; promoting girls-centered education by 
promoting community participation and accountability to reduce barriers of education for girls; 
developing social and behavior change (SBC) to increase adoption of key WASH behaviors and 
address harmful gender norms that prohibit women and girls from equally benefiting from 
WASH and sanitation services; and providing lectures on sexuality, prevention of HIV/AIDS 
and pregnancy including gender stereotypes to improve the health status of girls and boys.The 
manager of each component will also be responsible of sharing new knowledge/evidence and 
best practices related to girls education and educational reform at the teacher training colleges. 
They, collectively and individually, will support/guide the team of technical experts to design the 
necessary professional development packages, course design, curriculum development, and 
systemic and institutional reform. They are also expected to provide technical advice based upon 
expertise and knowledge of evidence-based methods and strategies, current practice, and 
established research standards to ensure quality and rigorous design. 


 The Technical Components Managers must meet the following minimum set of qualifications: 

● A master’s degree in Education or a relevant field from an internationally 
recognized university; 
● A minimum of 10 years of professional experience in the successful development 
and implementation of educational reform at university and pre-university levels 
● Strong knowledge in education; specific experience in one or more of the areas of 
curriculum development and integration, project-based, inquiry-based teaching 
and learning, teacher education and/or educational policy reform is desired; 
● Proven experience in mentorship and staff capacity building; and, 
● Fluency in English and Portuguese. 


Monitor, Evaluation and Learning Specialist: 

The MEL Officer will develop the MEL Plan and contribute to the effective implementation of 
the M&E policy, ensures that minimum M&E requirements for AGE Activities are met and 
participants are equally involved in the conduct of thematic and crosscutting 
monitoring 
activities. The MEL Officer will ensure that M&E activities are designed and implemented to 
assess and address GBV in schools; increase access to family planning services to reduce the 
incidence of pregnancy and HIV among young girls and boys, and increase access to improved 
sanitation services to improve the management of menstruation for girls and foster school 
retention. The MEL Officer will ensures that M&E activities are designed and implemented to 
assess projects’ relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability of results; 
monitoring activities are carried out in a credible and systematic manner; lessons and 
recommendations are used for improving projects’ implementation design and contribute to 
improving the priorities and result based oucomes. 

Letters of commitment, resumes (three pages maximum) including a half page summary of 
qualifications of all key personnel and core technical staff should be included in the annexes. 

Qualifications of key personnel: The Applicant must propose appropriate and required 
qualifications for all key personnel positions, as well as qualified individuals whom they deem 
appropriate for the anticipated role of each key personnel position. 

 

NOTE: USAID reserves the right to determine relevance of education and experience 
proposed. 

Applicants should explain how the key personnel positions, as well as other proposed positions, 
provide the complete set of skills listed above. The staffing level and pattern may be increased or 
modified over time if needed to provide effective support to field programs as they evolve, rather 
than from the onset. 

In an annex to the technical application, Applicants must provide resumes and proposed position 
descriptions for the candidates proposed for all key personnel and long-term professional 


positions. The resumes should indicate the names of the proposed personnel and demonstrate that 
the proposed key personnel and long-term professional staff possess the skills and knowledge to 
effectively carry out their proposed responsibilities. 

Resumes must be no more than three (3) pages in length for each proposed individual and must 
be presented in chronological order starting with the most recent experience. For Key Personnel, 
each resume must be accompanied by a SIGNED letter of commitment from each candidate 
indicating his/her: (a) availability to serve in the stated position, in terms of days after award; (b) 
intention to serve for a stated term of the service; and (c) agreement to the compensation levels 
which correspond to the levels set forth in the cost application. References may be checked for 
all proposed key personnel and long-term personnel. Applicants must provide current contact 
information, phone and email address for at least three (3) references for each proposed Key 
Personnel. 

Other Required Project Personnel 

Applicants have the discretion to determine the proper number and mix of additional personnel including 
other long-term permanent staff, consultants, personnel from local organizations, short-term technical 
staff, and others to meet project requirements, and to describe them in the technical Application. If 
Applicants propose technical leads for particular areas, USAID/Mozambique strongly encourages that 
they consider locally (non-overseas)-hired technical leads for most positions. All personnel must 
demonstrate exceptional written and oral communication skills in English and Portuguese, and have an 
excellent command of the technical area. Familiarity with the political, social, economic and cultural 
context of working in Mozambique is also necessary. 

Past Performance 

(1) Past Performance information will only be requested from the apparently successful 
applicant(s). It will be used for both risk assessment and greatest value decision by USAID. Also 
note that USAID may use past performance information obtained from other than the sources 
identified by the Applicant 

 

7. Business (Cost) Application Format 


The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as 
concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application 
must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below 
this listing with the letters for each requirement): 


a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 
b) SF 424 Form(s) 
c) Required Certifications and Assurances 











 

 

 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application. 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 
d) Budget and Budget Narrative 





 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget 
Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The 
applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in 


Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including 
sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and 
reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in 
other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 
of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale 
used and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 


4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per 
unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and 
supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of 
any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable 
property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – If applicable 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of 
costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the 
applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an 
Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. 
Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award 
subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit 
Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this 


methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as 
a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may 
apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges 
indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. Guidance to AO: If the indirect costs are expected to be minimal or easily 
attributed to performance of a USAID agreement, the AO should delete this first bullet. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one 
program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

9) Cost Sharing – Cost Sharing is not a requirement for this NOOF. 
e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 





 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

e) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 



● DUNS Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 
f) Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 





 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to 
Help, then to International Registrants. 

 


g) History of Performance 
h) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 








 

History of performance will be required only from the apparent successful applicant. The 
apparent successful applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of 
performance for all its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements 
involving similar or related programs, not to exceed five (5) years or five (5) awards as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last five (5) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information 
concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such 
information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information 
and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award 

 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
"Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and 
positioned, and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host 
country citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the 
applicant, confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID 
commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 



USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision 
and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth. 
(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 
(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised 
of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American 
people” as found on the USAID Web site at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or APS 
states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible 
by (or with) the generous support of the American People” next to the 
USAID Identity when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the 
applicant must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased 
during publicity for the program or project. 
(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or 
identity that competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to 
develop a separate logo to consistently identify this program, the 
applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI of the 
RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 



(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, 
including direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the 
program to beneficiaries. 
(i) Describe the main program message. 








 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public 
service announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as 
appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or 
project to host country citizens, such as media releases, press 
conferences, public events, and so forth. Applicant must incorporate 
the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the American 
People.” 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the 
American people support this project or program. 



(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or 
ministry, including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country 
government. 
(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program 
materials and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be 
visibly acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 





 

 

 

e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be 
included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 


 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
“Marking Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials, and other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which 
comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American 
people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency and is found on 
the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the RFA or 
APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, 
seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an 
award. 


 


c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision 
and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials that the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the 
USAID Identity as part of the award, including: 
(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including 
visible infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature; 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio- 
visual productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet 
activities, promotional, informational, media, or communications 
products funded by USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by 
USAID, including commodities or equipment provided under 
humanitarian assistance or disaster relief programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, 
seminars, exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other 
public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the 
recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the 
support of the American people. 



(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 
(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the 
USAID Identity; 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to 
mark the program deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the 
program deliverables, and where the applicant will place the 








 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


marking; 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the 
USAID Identity , and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 



(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an 
explanation of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an 
exemption if USAID marking requirements would: 
(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or 
materials where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the 
program and materials. The applicant must identify the USAID 
Development Objective, Interim Result, or program goal furthered by 
an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, 
examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as 
independent. The applicant must explain why each particular 
deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys 
or audits, public service announcements, or other communications. The 
applicant must explain why each particular item or product is better 
positioned as host-country government item or product. 
(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how 
marking the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why 
marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. 
The applicant must identify the relevant norm and why marking 
would violate that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the 
applicable international law violated by the marking. 








 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and 
reasonableness and will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The 



Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the above information is adequately 
included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any 
approved exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or 
cooperative agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided 
otherwise. 


 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

3. CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 
1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant 
organization or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an 
Agency official involved in the competitive award decision-making 
process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term 
“conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of 
compromising, the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or 
recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits 
an SF-424. Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict 
of interest after submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the 
conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days 
following discovery. 
3. Organizational Conflict of Interest 








 

 

 

b. Organization Conflict of Interest 


 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that 
they are aware of that may provide the applicant with unfair competitive advantage in 
competing for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive 
advantage include but are not limited to situations in which an applicant or the 
applicant’s employee gained access to non-public information regarding a federal 
assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s employee was 
substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. 
USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the applicant. 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 


i) Funding Restrictions 





 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction is not authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters 
which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which 
all applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following 
criteria shown below: 

 

a) Ratings 


 

Adjective 

Definition 

Exceptional 

An Exceptional application has the following characteristics: 

● A comprehensive and thorough application of exceptional merit. 
● Application meets and fully exceeds the Government expectations or exceeds 
NFO objectives and presents very low risk or no overall degree of risk of 
unsuccessful performance. 
● Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that may exist. 


Very Good 

A Very Good application has the following characteristics: 

● An application demonstrating a strong grasp of the objectives. 
● Application meets NFO objectives and presents a low overall degree of risk of 
unsuccessful project performance. 
● Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that exist. 


Satisfactory 

A Satisfactory application has the following characteristics: 

● An application demonstrating a reasonably sound response and a good grasp of 
the objectives. 
● Application meets NFO objectives and presents a moderate overall degree of 
risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
● Strengths outweigh weaknesses. 


Marginal 

A Marginal application has the following characteristics: 

● The application shows a limited understanding of the objectives. 
● Application meets some or most of the NFO objectives, but presents a 
significant overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
● Weaknesses equal or outweigh any strength that exists. 





Unsatisfactory 

An Unsatisfactory application has the following characteristics: 

● The Application does not meet the NFO objectives or requires a major rewrite 
of the application. 
● Presents an unacceptable degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
● Weaknesses demonstrate a lack of understanding of the Government’s 
needs. 
● Weaknesses significantly outweigh any strength that exists. 




b) Merit Review Criteria 


The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
Request for Applications. 

 

Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Evaluation factors are weighted according to the order listed below: Technical Approach, 
including sub-factors Implementation Approach and Sustainability Plan; Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning Plan; Key Personnel, Management Plan and Institutional Capacity. These factors 
are in a descending order of importance. 

Criterion 

Instructions to 
applicants 

Evaluation criterion 

1. Technical Approach 
1.1 Implementation 
Approach 





See Section 
D.6.(a)(i). 

The implementation approach must demonstrate an in-
depth understanding of the development challenges, 
gaps, and opportunities in the Mozambican education 
sector, particularly rural based schools, outline specific 
activities and explain how the proposed activities would 
help schools to provide high quality and reliable 
education to Mozambican citizens to demand 
accountability. The application must articulate clearly 
how the activities will contribute to meet the program 
objectives and achieve the stated purpose, resulting in a 
higher outcome of having Mozambican citizens better 
informed and motivated to improve their lives and 
participate in community development. Applicants must 
consider an innovative yet realistic approach that is most 
appropriate and sustainable in the context of the 
education. The applicant must provide an effective 
process by which the implementer will develop, award, 




1.2 Sustainability 
Plan 







and monitor subgrants to achieve project results, 
including innovative grantmaking approaches that 
encourage/incentivize a matching or challenge grant 
mechanism for partnerships.An analysis of anticipated 
implementation challenges and a strategy to provide 
additional education sector support to address 
unanticipated and unknown needs that may rise during 
the activity implementation will be required, including a 
summary of expected outputs with their expected 
impact, using indicators that will be used to track 
progress towards the anticipated results. 

See Section 
D.6.(a)(ii). 

The Applicant should propose approaches and activities 
over the next five years that will lay the foundation for 
increased financial sustainability of education programs 
and strengthened linkages between citizens, the private 
sector, civil society and local government, as a way to 
foster greater sustainability. Investments to improve 
education sustainability will directly influence the 
ability of these outlets to generate domestic resources 
for their operations, resulting in viable businesses able 
to continue operations without donor funding. 




2. Monitoring, 
Evaluation and 
Learning (MEL) 
Plan 


See Section 
D.6.(b) 

The Applicant must propose a preliminary MEL Plan as 
part of its application, must include appropriate outcome 
indicators linked to each anticipated result. The MEL 
Plan must define a sound and realistic approach to 
measure the quality, effectiveness, and outcomes of 
implementation of the activity keeping in mind the 
possibility for insecurity and limited access to certain 
geographic locations at certain times. The Applicant 
must not limit itself to the illustrative indicators in 
Section A of this NOFO but must think creatively about 
what kinds of activities will best achieve the desired 
results in the Mozambican context and must be specific 
about which activities are expected to contribute to 
which results. The Plan must identify appropriate 
milestones, gender, youth, and People with Disabilities 
(PWDs) sensitive indicators and targets (including sex 
disaggregated targets), as well as plans to gather and 
utilize baseline data. 

3. Key Personnel, 
Management 
Plan and 
Institutional 
Capacity 


See Section 
D.6.(c) 

The Applicant must include an organizational chart and 
specify the composition and organizational context of 
the entire project team (including corporate office 
support and any sub-recipients/partners). Through the 
chart and accompanying narrative, the Applicant must 
specify clear lines of supervision, accountability, 
decision making and responsibility among staff. The 
Applicant must explain the management structure 
presented in the organizational chart with relationships 
among the individual positions described; logistical 
support; personnel management of staff; procurement 
arrangements for goods and services; and lines of 
authority and communication between organizations and 
staff. The Applicant must include a complete staffing 
plan for all activities. The Applicant must provide the 
name of the position, location of the position, the 
number of personnel per the position, organization of 
the position (Applicant or sub-recipient), individual staff 
level of effort per year and their roles and 
responsibilities. 



 


The table below outlines the Merit Review Criteria names and their order of importance: 

 

CRITERION 1 

Technical approach 

IMPORTANCE: 

Most important 

SUB-CRITERION 
1.1 

Implementation Plan 

 

Equally important 

SUB-CRITERION 
1.2 

Sustainability Plan 

 

Equally important 

CRITERION 2 

Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning (MEL) Plan 

IMPORTANCE: 

Second most 
important 

CRITERION 3 

Key Personnel, 
Management Plan and 
Institutional Capacity 

IMPORTANCE: 

Third most important 



 

c) Business Review 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 
2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting and Plans Requirements 


All reports listed below shall be submitted by the specified due dates for approval by the USAID 
AOR unless otherwise agreed upon with the AOR. Recipients will consult the AOR on the 
format and expected content of reports prior to submission. The Recipient should always be 
ready for revision in program indicators and reporting requirements. 

 

Deliverables/Reports 

Due Date 

Approval 

Annual Work Plan 

1st Draft 

60 days after the award date for 
the 1st year and by August 1 for 
the following fiscal years 

AOR 

Final Work Plan 

90 days after the award date for 
the 1st year and August 30 for the 
following year 

AOR 

Quarterly 
Progress Reports 

Reports are required 
to include quarterly 
and cumulative data 

30 days after the end of each fiscal 
quarter 

AOR 

Quarterly Financial 
(SF425) & Pipeline 
Analysis Report 
(including accruals) 

 

30 calendar days after the end of 
each quarter 

AOR & 
OFM 

Baseline Report 

If needed the 
applicant should 
discuss with the 
AOR) 

180 days after the award date 

AOR 

Environmental 
Monitoring and 
Mitigation Plan 
(EMMP) 

Award EMMP 

60 days after the award date, 
along with the First annual work 
plan 

AOR & 
MEO 




Subproject 
Environmental 
Reviews with 
EMMPs 

For sub grants, 
subcontracts or any 
activities that are not 
known at the time of 
the preparation of 
the award EMMP 

30 days prior to the approval of a 
sub-grant, sub-contract or any 
activity that were not included in 
the award EMMP 

AOR & 
MEO 

Monitory, Evaluation 
and Learning Plan 
(MEL) 

1st Draft 

60 days after the award date for 
the 1st year and by August 1 for 
the following fiscal years 

AOR 

Final MEL Plan 

90 days after the award date for 
the 1st year and August 30 for the 
following year 

 

Annual Report 

1st Draft 

30 days after the end of each fiscal 
year. 

AOR 

 

Final Annual Report 

 60 days after the end of the year. 

AOR 

Gender Analysis 

 

90 days after award date 

AOR 

Final Report - 
covering all years 
of the program 
implementation 
and performance. 

1st Draft 

60 days after the end of the project 
award 

AO & 
AOR 

Final Report 

90 days after project award 

AO & 
AOR 

Disposition Plan 
and Closeout Plan 

 

180 days before completion of the 
award 

AO & 
AOR 

Other Reporting 

 

Mutually agreed by partner and 
AOR/USAID 

AOR 



 

a. Annual Work Plan: Based on this PD, the recipient shall prepare and submit a detailed 
annual work-plan to guide the implementation process with a breakdown of activities and 
timelines and anticipated progress in the achievement of the activity results (consistent 
with the Activity M&E Plan), as well as the associated costs. The recipient shall ensure a 
collaborative process in work-plan development, consulting beneficiaries, partners, 
USAID and other relevant stakeholders in preparing the annual work-plan to ensure 
complementarity and shared ownership. In addition, the AOR may work with the 
Recipient to define particularly relevant sections of the work-plan that would enhance 
implementation, such as key assumptions and risks (as well as plans to mitigate and 
update these), lessons learned and work-plan adjustments going forward. 


 

 

b. Quarterly Reports: The Recipient shall submit quarterly reports that include narratives 
of quarterly achievements, and progress against the work plan, and agreed upon 
performance indicators. A format for the quarterly report shall be approved by the AOR. 
The quarterly report shall describe and assess the overall progress to date based upon 
agreed performance indicators. The reports shall also describe the accomplishments of 



the Recipient and the progress made during the past quarter; include information on key 
activities, both ongoing and completed during the quarter (e.g. meetings, training, 
workshops, significant events, subcontracts, and grants). 


The quarterly reports should provide information on the extent to which gaps between 
males and females were closed; what new opportunities for men and women were 
created; what differential negative impacts on males/females were addressed or avoided; 
and what needs and gender inequalities emerged or remained. Recipients shall notify 
USAID of developments that have a significant impact on the award-supported activities. 

The quarterly report provides the opportunity to discuss impacts of learning on the 
program, updates in key assumptions and the underlying development hypotheses. Also, 
notification shall be given in the case of problems, delays, or adverse conditions which 
materially impair the ability to meet the objectives of the award or which may have an 
impact on the development hypothesis or theory of change for the activity, and/or other 
activities (USG-funded or not) which might be informed by such learning. This 
notification shall include a statement of the action taken or contemplated, and any 
assistance needed to resolve the situation. The Recipient shall also prepare quarterly 
financial reports showing the amount of funding and level of effort spent and accrued 
during the quarter, cumulative spending, and estimates for the next quarter. The quarterly 
activity and financial reports are to be submitted within 30 days after the end of each 
fiscal quarter to the AOR at USAID/Mozambique. 

 

c. Annual Report: Annual performance reports on the project activities and progress 
against indicators are the responsibility of the Recipient and are needed by 
USAID/Mozambique to provide timely input to the USG’s Operational Plan. To the 
extent possible, the annual performance report should cover activities and results through 
the end of the fiscal year, and should review the cumulative experience, learning, 
adaptations and the implications of these for the year. However, the draft annual 
performance reports must be received by USAID 30 days after the end of the year and in 
final no later than 90 days after the end of the year. 


 

d. Final Report: A draft final report should be submitted to the AOR no later than 30 
calendar days after the completion of the activity. The final report is due 90 calendar days 
after the end of the award. Three copies should be submitted to the AOR. The report shall 
summarize the accomplishments of the agreement, methods of work used, and 
recommendations regarding unfinished work and/or program continuation, as well as key 
learnings from the total implementation experience. In addition the report should 
specifically address how the activity addressed gaps between males and females were 
closed; what new opportunities for men and women were created; what differential 
negative impacts on males/females were addressed or avoided; and what needs and 
gender inequalities emerged or remained. It shall cover the entire period of the award and 
include the cumulative results achieved, an assessment of the impact of the program, 
lessons learned and recommendations, any particularly notable impact stories (or 
challenges), and detailed financial information. It should be grounded in evidence and 



data. The final/completion report shall also contain an index of all reports and 
information products produced under the award. 


 

e. Financial Reporting 
● Quarterly Financial Report: In accordance with 22 CFR 226.52 the Federal Financial 
Reporting Form (FFR) will be required on a quarterly basis. FFR 425 must be 
submitted. 
● Other Quarterly Financial Reports: The purpose of this clause is to enable USAID to 
implement the tax provisions of its bilateral agreement with the GRM. To comply 
with this clause, the Contractor shall maintain records of all taxes paid to GRM with 
U.S. government funds as well as other financial information as may be required by 
USAID. The Applicant shall furnish this information to USAID in accordance with 
guidance circulated by the Contracting Officer, as amended from time to time. 


 

f. Baseline Report 


Given that USAID’S AGE will be continuing some of the activities initiated to improve girls 
education and safety however, it is anticipated the need to conduct a baseline survey. 
Applicant deems it necessary to conduct a baseline survey to establish the pre-intervention 
conditions, inform the development of tailored interventions and provide a basis for 
monitoring activity results and impacts, the applicant should include a rationale in the 
proposal. The proposed assessment should provide gender disaggregated statistics and also 
investigate specific gaps that exist between males and females with respect to the problem 
that is being addressed, and explain or indicate potential causes of those gaps and indicate 
what opportunities there are to promote women’s leadership and empowerment to project 
outcomes. The baseline report should be conducted after the Applicant has secured an 
approved activity MEL plan but within 6 months of contract award. 

 

g. Environmental Monitoring and Mitigation Plan 


This will be developed by the Applicant and approved by USAID prior to the launch of each 
activity having a potential adverse impact on the physical and natural environment. For any 
activity implemented under an IEE that has a Positive Determination (PD) or a Negative 
Determination with Conditions, contractors and grantees must develop EMMPs to implement 
these conditions. If a project contains no sub grants and all project activities are known in 
advance, the EMMP shall be included in the work plan and/or submitted with the work plan 
at the onset of the project (an annotated EMMP template can be found at 
http://www.usaidgems.org). If a project contains sub grants, subcontracts, or any activities 
that are not known at the time of the preparation of the work plan, subproject Environmental 
Reviews with EMMPs signed by the AOR and the MEO are necessary prior to the approval 
of a sub grant or sub activity. Signed Environmental Review Forms (ERFs) and 
Environmental Review Reports (ERRs) will be kept in USAID’s official files. Formats for 
ERF and ERR can be found at the following website: http://www.usaidgems.org 

 


h. Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL Plan) 


The activity MEL plan is a management tool that enables the Applicant and USAID to track 
whether desired results are being achieved and project implementation is being adapted to 
changing conditions. This plan should define critical performance indicators, data collection 
methods and the Applicant’s plans for analyzing, utilizing and sharing information for 
reporting, accountability, learning and adaptation. The activity MEL plan is a required 
document, with first draft due 60 days after the award and final documents due within 90 
days of the award. 

 

i. Gender Analysis 


Gender analysis is a tool for examining the differences between the roles that women and 
men play in communities and societies, the different levels of power they hold, their differing 
needs, constraints and opportunities, and the impact of these differences on their lives. 

The gender analysis should identify root causes of existing gender inequalities or obstacles to 
female empowerment in the context of the activity, so that the applicant can seek out 
opportunities to promote women’s leadership and participation. The gender analysis should 
also identify potential adverse impacts and/or risks of gender based exclusion that could 
result from planned activities, including: (a) Displacing women from access to resources or 
assets; (b) Increasing the unpaid work or caregiver burden of females relative to males; (c) 
Conditions that restrict the participation of women or men in project activities and benefits 
based on pregnancy, maternity/paternity leave, or marital status; (d) Increasing the risk of 
gender based violence, including sexual exploitation or human trafficking, sexually 
transmitted diseases, and HIV/AIDS; and (e) Marginalizing or excluding women in political 
and governance processes. Because males and females are not homogenous groups, the 
gender analysis should also to the extent possible disaggregate by income, region, caste, race, 
ethnicity, disability, and other relevant social characteristics and explicitly recognize the 
specific needs of young girls and boys, adolescent girls and boys, adult women and men, and 
older women and men. 

 

j. Branding & Marking Plan 


The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into 
any resulting award. Applicants are not required to submit a Branding Strategy and 
Marketing Plan with their application. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

Judite Caetano 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Mozambique 

E-mail: jcaetano@usaid.gov with cc copy to jbadiane@usaid.gov 

 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in 
USAID’s acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an 
award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Item Description 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

Year 5 

Total 

Salaries 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Travel and 
Transportation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sub Total 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Applicants are required to submit budget information along with AO must require the 
submission of the SF-424A. 

 


 

ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that 
is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST 
RATE AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED 
AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR 
TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 




 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS 
(JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL 
ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 




 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS 
(April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

 


ANNEX 3 – WORK PLAN TEMPLATE 

https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1864/attachment-f-work-plan-template 

 

ANNEX 4 – MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING PLAN TEMPLATE 

 

 
Annex 4 
-Activity_MEL_Plan_Template.docx

 

ANNEX 5 – NOFO WEBSITE LINKS 

 

The following documents are located at the URLs provided below: 

● USAID Mozambique Country Development and Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) 


https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/CDCS_February_2019_Mozambique_
update20202.pdf 

● USAID Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy 


https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/GenderEqualityPolicy_0.pdf 

 


