 

 

Issue Date: October 15, 2021 

Deadline for Questions: October 25, 2021, 4:00 PM (Morocco Time) 

Concept Papers Deadline Submission: November 22, 2021 

Closing Time: 4:00 PM (Morocco Time) 

 

Subject: USAID/Morocco Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72060822RFA00001 – 
Amendment 000001 

 

Program/Opportunity Title: Bridge to Middle School Activity 

 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

To: All Interested Respondents/Parties: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) through its Mission in 
Morocco (USAID/Morocco) seeks concept papers from eligible applicants to implement the 
Bridge to Middle School Activity. 

 

USAID intends to make a single award to the responsible applicant whose application best meets 
the objectives of this funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this 
NOFO subject to a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in applying are encouraged to read 
this NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and selection process. While one award is anticipated as a result of this Notice of 
Funding Opportunity (NOFO), USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the concept paper 
applications submitted. Subject to funds availability, the anticipated funding for the 
USAID/Morocco Bridge to Middle School Activity is $25 million over a five-year period. Final 
authority for assistance awards resides with the USAID/Morocco Agreement Officer. 

 

The USAID/Morocco Bridge to Middle School Activity will follow a “Three-Phase Merit Review” 
process of application selection: 

● Phase 1 is the submission, review, and evaluation of a written concept paper (estimated 
timeframe for Concept Paper selection is December 2021). Applicants will be evaluated 
based on the Phase 1 (Concept Paper). The Apparently Successful Applicant (ASA) will 
be invited to Phase 2, Co-creation, and all other applicants will be notified that were not 
selected. 
● Only the ASA will be invited to participate in Phase 2, Co-creation (estimated timeframe 
for co-creation is January 2022). For Phase 2, USAID will convene a co-creation event 
with USAID, the Applicant, and other stakeholders. 
● If the Co-creation is successful, the Apparently Successful Applicant (ASA) will be invited 
to Phase 3 and requested to submit a Full Application. The ASA will develop and submit 
a Final Application, including a cost application, for final consideration. The Final 
Application will then be evaluated for determination of the award. 



If the Co-creation is not successful, USAID/Morocco may consider another Co-creation 
process with another highly ranked applicant. 

 

Details regarding the requirements for Phase 1 are described in this document. The requirements 
for Phases 2 and 3 will be provided to the ASA at the completion of Phase 1. Additional details 
regarding the concept paper evaluation are provided in Section D - Concept Paper Submission 
Information. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the website to 
ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity. It is the 
responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the entire NOFO has been received from the internet 
in its entirety and USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or 
conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the 
NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. The registration 
process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to begin 
registration early in the process, if not registered. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 

to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted on www.grants.gov. Eligible 
parties interested in submitting a concept paper are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly to 
understand the type of program sought, concept paper submission requirements, and selection 
process. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the U.S. Government, nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or a concept paper. Concept papers are 
submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s 
expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

Zachary Clarke 

Regional Agreement Officer 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

 

Section A – Program Description………………………………………………….…………….. 4 

Section B – Award Information…………...………………………………..…….………..…….17 

Section C – Eligibility Information…………………………………...…………….…………....19 

Section D – Application and Submission Information………………..………………………....20 

Section E – Application Review Information………………………………..…………………..24 

Section F – Award and Administration Information…………………………….....…………....27 

Section G – Agency Contacts……………………………………………………………………40 

Section H – Other Information……………………………………………………….………….41 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

“Bridge to Middle School”/“Le Chemin vers le Collège” 

 

I. Introduction & Background 

In the past few decades, the Government of Morocco has made sweeping and positive changes in 
its education sector. Enrollments have risen, teacher qualifications have improved, important 
curricular reforms have been enacted, and programs like the USAID-funded “National Reading 
Program” (NPR) and JICA’s “Promoting Education with Equity and Quality” (PEEQ) have 
addressed critical gaps in instructional quality, improving students’ mastery of reading and math 
in the primary grades. 

 

However, the Government of Morocco’s (GOM’s) Education Vision 2030 commits the GOM to 
ensuring that “Moroccan schools...offer, to all citizens and equally, a quality education and 
training, based on the Nation’s supreme values and principles.” However, this ambition has not 
been fully realized. The World Bank estimates that 66 percent of Morocco’s primary school 
learners are in “learning poverty,” and therefore unable to read a simple sentence by the age of 10. 
On the 2019 Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), Moroccan 4th 
graders scored the lowest of any in the MENA region in both math and science, and Moroccan 8th 
graders were outscored by their peers in 8 of the participating nations. Similarly, on the 2018 
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), Moroccan 15-year old, on average, 
scored next to last in reading, math, and science, with Lebanon being the only country with lower 
scores. Gender equity is a concern throughout the system, particularly in rural areas where girls do 
not have the same opportunities as their male peers to attend or complete school. By some 
estimates, the illiteracy rate for women in rural areas is as high as 80 percent.1 Learners with 
disabilities are similarly severely disadvantaged. The devastating effects of the COVID pandemic 
on the education system have unleashed a wave of learning loss, and the effects of climate change 
on livelihoods in rural areas are making it increasingly difficult for families to prioritize school. In 
short, while some strong foundations have been laid for educational quality and equity for all, the 
GOM requires additional investment and collaboration to continue its momentum towards 
achieving its 2030 Education Vision. 

1 
Gregory M. White, “Kingdom of Morocco,” in The Government and Politics of the Middle East and North Africa, eds. Mark Gosiorowski and 
Sean L. Yom, Westview Press, 2017., p 531. 

 

 

The Bridge to Middle School program (“Bridge”) will support the GOM’s next steps in its ongoing 
education reforms, with particular attention to inclusion and equity, gender dynamics, the realities 
of education in a post-COVID environment, and the growing need for appropriate education sector 
responses to the challenges of climate change. Through Bridge, USAID will partner with the 
Moroccan Ministry of Education (MEN) to improve learning outcomes in Arabic and STEM 
subjects (grades 4-9) as well as in English (grades 7-9). In doing so, Bridge will better prepare the 


education system for a scale-up of high-quality instruction in key subject areas in both the upper 
primary and lower secondary grades. 

 

II. Program Purpose & Goal 

The main purpose of Bridge is to build the capacity of MEN to implement new, student-centered 
curricula in Arabic and selected STEM subjects (grades 4-9) as well as English (grades 7-9), in 
ways that have measurable impacts on learning outcomes. 

 

The goal of the program is to improve the performance of MEN central directorates, education 
academies (AREFs), provincial directorates (DPs), and schools in employing evidence-based 
pedagogies that promote continuous learning in select content areas, emphasizing strengthened 
critical thinking skills. 

 

III. Program Objectives 

Bridge has three objectives jointly contributing to the achievement of the program goal: 

● Objective One: Enhance the Moroccan education system’s ability to improve learning 
outcomes in upper primary (grade 4-6) Arabic, Math, and Science 
● Objective Two: Enhance the Moroccan education system’s ability to improve learning 
outcomes in lower secondary (grade 7-9) Arabic, English, and selected Science subjects 
(physics/chemistry, taught as one subject, and life/earth sciences, (biology and geology), 
taught as one subject) 
● Objective Three: Enhance the Moroccan education system’s preparedness to scale up 
successful practices in these subject areas and grades 


 

IV. Program Results 

Bridge is anticipated to achieve quantifiable results at both the goal and the objective levels, as 
follows: 

● Goal-level Result: An increased number of institutions and actors demonstrating improved 
performance in implementing high quality instruction in the Bridge program target subject 
areas and grade levels. 
● Objective One Result: In the Bridge experimental schools, upper primary learners achieve 
increases in proficiency in Arabic, Math, and Science. 
● Objective Two Result: In the Bridge experimental schools, middle school (lower 
secondary) learners achieve increases in proficiency in Arabic, English, Life/Earth 
Sciences, and Physics/Chemistry 
● Objective Three Result: Implementation of policies and practices that support scaling up 
of interventions proven effective during the experimental phases of the Bridge program. 


 

V. Program Parameters 

The Bridge program will operate within the below parameters. 

1. Geographic Coverage 

Bridge is a “proof of concept” development and testing activity that will demonstrate how 
education system actors can support a child’s transition from upper primary to middle school. 
Bridge will operate in 30 primary schools and 60 middle schools across 3 regions of Morocco, 
with a proportional split between public and private schools, and with a clear “feeder” relationship 


between the selected primary and middle schools.2 If work in the experimental schools proves 
effective, the MEN plans to expand the use of the new curricula and materials to all 3,700,000 
primary and 1,600,000 middle school students. 

2 
Without this relationship, gauging the strength of the “Bridge” between primary and middle school will be difficult. 

Priority regions for inclusion in the Bridge program will include those that: a) have poor outcomes 
on the TIMSS and the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS), b) are 
significantly rural and/or isolated, c) experience significant (i.e. above the national average) drop-
out from target grade levels, d) experience particular challenges in enrolling or maintaining girls 
in school, and e) experience particular challenges of multilingualism. Final selection of regions 
and experimental schools will be made in consultation with the MEN and USAID. 

2. Financial Responsibility by Program Phase 

Under the pilot phase, (objectives one and two), USAID is responsible for furnishing all technical 
assistance, including training, and coaching the MEN working groups, printing and distributing 
manuals and guides, training trainers, training teachers, monitoring and evaluating the progress of 
the classroom work, evaluating student outcomes, and evaluating changes in institutional capacity. 

As curricular implementation for each grade is scaled up, the responsibilities between the MEN 
and USAID will shift. In the scale-up phases, (objective three), USAID, through Bridge, is 
responsible for offering technical guidance for the scale-up process and the training of trainers in 
all 12 regions (Academies). However, the majority of the costs in the scale-up phases will be 
incurred by MEN. The table below summarizes this anticipated cost break-out for the scale-up 
phase. 

 

 

Ministry of Education 

USAID 

Institutional Capacity Assessments 

 

✔ 

Technical Assistance (i.e. guidance to working groups) 

 

✔ 

Printing and distribution of manuals and guides 

✔ 

 

Training of trainers (in all 12 regions) 

 

✔ 

Training of teachers (in all 12 regions) 

✔ 

 

Monitoring and evaluating the progress of the work in classrooms 

✔ 

✔ 



 

3. Collaboration and Sub-Awards 

USAID has designed Bridge under the guidance and direction of the MEN, and it is intended to 
complement, not duplicate, efforts from other donors in the sector. In that spirit, the implementing 
partner for Bridge will need to be aware of and collaborate with all of the following: 

 

 

 


 

Donor 

Initiative 

Relationship to Bridge 

JICA 

JICA has implemented two major versions of support to 
the MEN: a large loan program to support the Ministry’s 
execution of its technical and budget plans, and a first 
phase of a smaller “off-budget” program that has piloted 
math and science instruction in a series of primary 
schools. This smaller PEEQ program is in the process of 
moving into its second phase, with a focus on only math 
instruction and on remediation. It has produced 
measurable improvements in student outcomes. 

JICA will work in parallel to the Bridge partner to 
develop the math and IT modules needed for middle 
school instruction under Bridge. USAID, the MEN 
and JICA will coordinate to achieve the STEM goals 
of Bridge. As STEM programs involve the integrated 
approach to teaching and learning of science, 
technology and mathematics, Bridge will work closely 
with JICA to ensure the necessary integration. 

MCC 

MCC’s “Lycee Atahadi” program seeks to improve 
school infrastructure, governance, and teacher training 
in STEM and language in a small number of 
experimental schools. The MEN found the program to 
be highly effective and hopes to see it inform the work 
under the Bridge program. The MEN especially hopes 
that a “whole of school” perspective like that used in the 
Lycee Atahadi program might also be used in the work 
under the Bridge program. 

Bridge partners should examine how to use the results 
of the Lycee Atahadi program in teacher training, 
materials digitization, and CSO and parent 
involvement. The ministry is anticipating a similar 
“whole school” approach to the work under the Bridge 
program as used in the Lycee Atahadi program. 

 

EU 

The European Union’s PIEF program is focused on 
system reform, with a significant “results based 
financing” component offered to the Ministry of Finance 
and the Ministry of Education if they are able to meet 
certain functionality indicators for system performance. 

Bridge partners need to be sure that Bridge system 
reform expectations complement but do not duplicate 
those promoted by the EU under PIEF. 

 

UNICEF 

UNICEF Morocco under its new strategy aims to 
improve the equity, quality, and transparency of 
governance in education. UNICEF supports 2nd chance 
schools, is developing a drop-out prevention strategy, is 
increasing its focus on girls’ education and education for 
students with disabilities and plans to work on school 
financing and governance at the school level. 

In the Bridge schools, especially if they overlap with 
zones of interest with UNICEF, applying strategies for 
drop-out prevention, inclusion, and transparent 
governance that are coherent with those of UNICEF 
will assist both Bridge and the ministry to develop 
scalable national approaches to improving equity, 
quality, and transparency. 

World Bank 

The World Bank finances or plans to finance several 
different types of support to the Ministry of Education. 
These include: reforms in early childhood development 
and pre-primary education, efforts to reinforce pre-
service and in-service training (based on results based 
financing), efforts to improve school governance and 
financing (also through RBF) and plans to support 
school improvement planning in 300 primary schools. 
The Bank is also very interested in work in student 
assessment in grades 2, 4, and 6. 

Bridge partners should coordinate on questions of 
teacher training and school improvement planning with 
the World Bank, particularly if any of the Bridge 
intervention schools are schools that are in common 
with the efforts financed by the World Bank. The 
World Bank’s interest in assessment is also a rich 
opportunity for collaboration. 

The British 
Council 

The British Council produces English programming to 
support improved English instruction in Morocco. 

Bridge partners could integrate use of these programs 
as part of a larger effort to improve English instruction 
in middle school in Morocco. 



 

Bridge partner(s) are also expected to collaborate across the MEN departments responsible for 
eventual scale-up of the new education reforms. At the central level, these include MEN’s senior 
leadership, (the Minister, Secretary General, and the Cabinet), as well as the curriculum 
development, teacher training, and assessment departments (please see information in the 
attachments on relevant initiatives in teacher training and assessment). At the decentralized level, 


this includes AREFs, PDs, schools, and communities. Bridge partner(s) will also need to 
collaborate with the Initiative Nationale de Développement Humain, (INDH), a GOM program 
working in the education sector to improve the equality and equity of human services. Applicants 
should carefully consider how to work with this wide array of local partners and propose a 
tailored approach to include these vital stakeholders. 

Finally, USAID prioritizes Moroccan ownership of the Bridge program. Therefore, USAID 
expects the program to include at least one qualified local partner (Public, private, NGOs, or 
other Moroccan organizations) able to significantly contribute to national education reform. As 
a reminder, USAID prohibits exclusive partnerships with local actors. 

4. Cross-Cutting Technical Considerations 

As highlighted in the RFI (Attachment 1), there are a number of cross-cutting technical 
considerations to take into account in the implementation of Bridge. These include the following: 

● Promoting gender equity and inclusion. In all aspects of Bridge, USAID strongly 
encourages partners to test, identify, and amplify concrete approaches that are shown to 
improve gender equity and the inclusion of marginalized learners and to support the 
creation of a safe learning environment through GBV prevention and social norms change. 
These could include but not be limited to approaches to reduce high drop-out rates 
especially among girls, approaches to enable students of modest means or other 
constraining circumstances to participate in the program and to choose a career path based 
on fields of study they master and not based on their gender, and approaches to support 
teachers in meeting the needs of learners with disabilities. The retained applicant will be 
required to conduct a gender analysis at the Bridge activity level once the award is made. 
● Mitigating the ongoing effects of COVID-19. USAID encourages applicants to examine 
the effects of the COVID pandemic on Bridge’s chances of success in the chosen 90 
experimental schools, and to program flexibly in light of their findings, so as to identify 
solutions for improved learning at scale that can withstand the ongoing stressors of the 
pandemic. 
● Promoting the innovative AND appropriate use of technology. One strategy for scale-
up of Bridge interventions that interests the MEN is the use of distance education, both for 
teachers and for students. There are many initiatives in distance education already 
underway in the education sector, including the MEN’s E-Takwine platform for teacher 
resources, MOOCs generated for teacher preparation through the USAID HEP-M program, 
and the TilmideTice and the Asafeer platform for supplementary reading material for 
students. Applicants/implementing partners have an opportunity to propose how distance 
learning using these and other resources can support the achievement of Bridge goals and 
objectives. 
● Integrating climate change-related instruction. Climate change considerations are an 
important part of USAID education programming. Applicants are encouraged to consider 
innovative approaches for including climate change mitigation materials in experimental 
schools, and for supporting the MEN in integrating climate change information across the 
system during the scale-up phase. 


 

● Private Sector Engagement 


According to a recent USAID-funded study, “An effective approach to leveraging the 
power of the private sector is essentially to foster collaboration among the most innovative 
actors and the social-impact driven investors (MEG study).” Moroccan private sector 


actors may be willing to contribute expertise in the design and implementation of this 
program, as they are the eventual recipients of the graduates. Actors like the major 
telecommunications players (Maroc TELECOM, Orange, Inwi), banks with foundations 
(BMCE and the Fondation Banque Populaire), the Office Cherifien de Phosphate (OCP), 
Microsoft, and the Société Nationale de Radio et Télévision (SNRT) could all contribute 
either in-kind or monetary support to Bridge. Partners are encouraged to propose how 
actors like these could: a) provide free media time (radio, TV, or mobile) to promote the 
implementation of the educational reforms; b) print educational materials (or provide 
funding to the MEN to do so); c) provide or subsidize digital supplementary materials; d) 
provide financial resources to subsidize orienting the school improvement planning process 
in Bridge schools towards achieving programmatic objectives; and/or e) invest in other 
creative ways in the Bridge program. 

 

VI. Interventions 


Unless otherwise noted, all interventions listed below are illustrative. 

1. Objective One: Enhance the Moroccan Education System’s Ability to Improve 
Learning Outcomes in Upper Primary Arabic, Math, and Science 

Under this objective, the program will focus on developing, in the 30 pilot schools, interventions 
to improve Arabic reading, math, and science instruction in grades 4, 5 and 6 that the MEN can 
eventually take to scale nationwide. To launch work under this objective, the Recipient of the 
Bridge program will undertake a mandatory study, in the pilot schools, that will address two 
fundamental questions: a) what are the current performance levels of the grades 4, 5, and 6 students 
in Arabic (reading), math, and science; and b) what is the degree of application of the new primary 
school curricula3 in those subjects? This study will yield answers to sub-questions like: a) how 
well prepared are grades 4, 5, and 6 students to engage in a French-based curriculum4 for STEM 
instruction starting in grade 7?; and b) how much training, and support are teachers receiving5 for 
their implementation of the new grades 4, 5, and 6 curricula? USAID is interested in applicants’ 
suggestions of what other questions and sub-questions could help ground the work under 
this objective. 

3In August, 2020, the MEN released its first complete draft of a new primary school curriculum, rolling out new learning materials and teacher training for grades one 
through four. This included a completely new curriculum in Arabic language, based on work completed through the NPR program. The COVID-19 pandemic interrupted 
the primary school curriculum reform process. However, the curriculum roll out for grades 5-6 is scheduled for as soon as emic conditions allow and is likely to be in 
process during the Bridge program. 

4 
Morocco’s recent education law transfers instruction of all science and math subjects in middle school and the upper grades of school to French, in the hopes of better 
preparing students for their eventual launch into a career or a profession. Monitoring of the successes and challenges of implementing these new curricula in French will 
be an essential part of the work under the individual program intermediate results. 

5During the pilot phase of the new Arabic curriculum for upper primary grades, MEN and USAID-sponsored technical teams identified a number of realities. Some 3rd 
and 4th grade students had not fully acquired necessary decoding skills, teachers needed specific training on activities for fluency and comprehension instruction, 
instruction in grammar, morphology, and dictation needed to be embedded in active reading, and more opportunities were needed for practice in oral MSA. These 
findings are relevant to planning the Bridge upper primary interventions. 

Having examined the “trouble spots” in upper primary Arabic, math, and science instruction, 
Bridge partners will test and evaluate interventions to improve students’ learning outcomes in the 
target subject areas and grade levels in the pilot schools. USAID encourages the implementation 
of interventions for instructional improvement that target both individual teacher capacity 
and institutional capacities at the school, PD, AREF, and central levels of the education 
system. Interventions could include but need not be limited to: a) improved training and support 
for teachers (virtual or in-person) in teaching these subjects, with a particular focus on gender 
equity, supporting students with disabilities, and assisting other marginalized groups, and/or b) 
improved training and support for subject-specific inspectors in Arabic, math, and science. Each 
intervention selected must be well-justified by the data from the performance outcomes study, be 


well-studied, and, as the program moves towards the scale-up phase, either be recommended for 
discontinuation or for scale-up. The calendar agreed upon with the MEN for the implementation 
of these upper primary interventions is as follows: 

 

2022-2023 

2023-2024 

2024-2025 

2025-2026 

2026-2027 

Study of upper primary 
students’ performance 
and of degree of 
curricular adoption in 
Arabic (reading), math, 
and science in grades 
4,5, and 6 in the pilot 
schools 

Piloting of select 
interventions to address 
difficulties in grade 4 
instruction in the key 
subject areas, with a 
report by the end of the 
academic year on 
promising practices 

Piloting of select 
interventions to 
address difficulties in 
grade 5 instruction in 
the key subject areas, 
with a report by the 
end of the year on 
promising practices, 

Piloting of select 
interventions to 
address difficulties in 
grade 6 instruction in 
the subject areas, with 
a report at the end of 
the year on promising 
practices 

Compilation and presentation of 
recommendations for interventions to 
strengthen grade 4-6 instruction in key 
subject areas at national scale (based 
on the efforts under the pilot) 

MEN to start the scaling interventions, 
and Bridge partners to provide hands-
on support and mentorship/ technical 
support as needed. 



 

Also under Objective One, Bridge partner(s) will work to significantly improve assessment 
practices for the upper primary grades, both at the classroom and at the systems levels. Despite 
significant recent progress in improving the availability of student data,6 Morocco is still striving 
to build uniform and fully transparent processes for assessing and reporting on primary students’ 
learning outcomes. Activities to achieve improved capacity in student assessment could include: 
a) proposing improvements to current practices in grades 4-6 assessment in Arabic literacy, math, 
and science that could allow for provincial and regional aggregation of student outcomes, and/or 
b) supporting the efforts of the central MEN evaluation department to develop a national exam at 
the grade 4 level. The recipients will be encouraged to work with the MEN to develop a holistic 
and comprehensive approach to improving upper primary assessment, and to pilot that 
approach in the Bridge upper primary pilot schools. The ultimate results of these efforts should 
be readily accessible information on grade 4, 5, and 6 student performance in Arabic (reading), 
math, and science in pilot schools, and personnel and institutions able to continue to produce and 
publish this type of information system-wide after the close of the program. 

6Although there is a 6th grade national exam, the results of which can be accessed through the “MASSAR” portal by individual students based on a sign-in number, 
those results are not available to the general public. It is also not possible either at a national level or a regional level to find data on students’ foundational skills 
achievement for any grade below grade 6. 

 

2. Objective Two: Enhance the Moroccan Education System’s Ability to Improve 
Learning Outcomes in Lower Secondary (grade 7-9) Arabic, English, and Science 
(Selected Subjects) 

Under this objective, Bridge will focus on improving Arabic, English, and certain aspects of STEM 
instruction in grades 7-9 in the pilot lower secondary schools. Curriculum development and roll-
out for these subjects are at different stages of development. 

Arabic: Moroccan middle school students study Arabic for five hours a week. The MEN is 
currently preparing to revise, test, and redistribute the Arabic language middle school curriculum 
and accompanying materials. A recent USAID-sponsored review of the current Arabic language 
curriculum for middle school revealed the following opportunities for improvement: a) articulation 
of the middle school curriculum with the new upper primary Arabic curriculum, b) improved and 
clarified developmental progressions in the middle school curriculum, c) a need to identify a 
universal set of themes or concepts to which to connect ideas and activities across grades in the 


curriculum, d) inclusion of diversified activities, and e) plans for an evaluation and support system 
based on clear standards that show students’ progress on the acquisition of key skills. 

Under Objective Two, Bridge partner(s) will support MEN working groups to revise, pilot, and 
finalize the grades 7-9 Arabic curricula, taking the above findings into consideration and aligning 
the new proposed curriculum with the Global Proficiency Framework. The new Arabic middle 
school curriculum should provide students with a more evidence-based, successful learning 
experience. Application of a similar approach as that used in the new English curricula for 
Moroccan middle school (see below) could assist in achieving that end result. Applicants are 
encouraged to propose effective and innovative approaches for collaborating with the MEN 
to implement the Bridge pilot to create the most effective Arabic middle school curriculum 
possible. Detailed data collection on the experience of applying the new Arabic curriculum 
in the pilot schools should inform the work to scale up the curriculum in the out years of the 
Bridge program. 

English: One of Morocco’s most important curricular reform initiatives of the past five years has 
been to progress towards teaching English in all middle schools. Most Moroccan middle school 
students currently study English for 2 hours a week7. This effort has been fast-tracked to honor 
His Majesty the King’s promise to the nation that free English instruction will be broadly available 
to the entire population. USAID has supported this effort throughout 2021 with a pilot production 
of 7th grade prototype thematic units, lessons, and teachers guides for middle schools. These 
prototypes are based on the Cognitive and Academic Language Learning (CALLA) approach to 
English instruction, The core concept of the CALLA approach is that students need an opportunity 
to learn strategies for the mastery of both academic content and language functions, so that they 
can not only communicate but also study and work in the target language. This is a major 
innovation in the Moroccan education system. 

7 
Middle school English instruction is not yet scaled nation-wide but is active in 50-60% of middle schools.. By 2026, the MEN aims to take middle 
school English instruction nationwide. 

Under Objective Two, the Bridge implementing partner will, mandatorily, support MEN working 
groups to revise, pilot, and finalize the grades 7-9 English curricula, using the products from the 
USAID-sponsored consultants as a point of departure. Approximately $5 million of the available 
budget for the Bridge activity has been set aside to support this work. The implementing partner 
will assist the MEN to: a) finalize the draft standards framework for English for grades 7-9, b) 
finalize the scopes and sequences documents for English for grades 7-9, c) finalize the teaching 
and learning materials for English in grades 7-9, including model lessons, d) develop both 
formative and summative evaluation items, e) train trainers (inspectors) for implementation of the 
new curricula and materials in the Bridge pilot schools for grades 7-9, f) coach as needed for the 
piloting of the new curricula and materials, g) monitor and evaluate the implementation of the new 
curricula and materials, h) implement regular formative evaluation of student progress in mastering 
core concepts from the new middle school curricula, i) design and test remedial classwork and/or 
other routines to determine whether or not they build student skills, possibly through an adaptation 
of the TARL methodology, j) reinforce teachers’ and schools’ ability to track individual student 
progress, and k) develop and test digital or other distance learning or supplementary applications 
to support the implementation of the English language curriculum in grades 7-9 (given the small 
number of actual instructional hours for the subject). 

USAID and the MEN’s joint overall goal for all language curricula piloted in Bridge middle 
schools is that instruction should reinforce students’ abilities to use language for discussion, 
debate, and analysis in both professional and scholastic settings. Also, all language curricula 
drafted in the course of this activity should provide initial indications as to how learning for 


students with disabilities and how gender equity can be addressed. These indications can then be 
used in the development of teacher training and observation tools to try and enhance inclusivity 
and gender equity at the classroom level. Applicants are encouraged to propose effective and 
innovative approaches for collaborating with the MEN to implement the Bridge pilot to 
create the most effective English middle school curriculum possible. Detailed data collection 
on the experience of applying the new English curriculum in the pilot schools should inform 
work to scale up the curriculum in the out years of the program. 

STEM: Moroccan middle school students receive two hours of instruction in life/earth sciences 
(biology and geology, taught as one subject), two hours of instruction in physics and chemistry 
(taught as one subject), 4 hours of instruction in math, two hours of instruction in technology, and 
two hours of instruction in computer science (in certain regions) per week. Together, these subjects 
comprise Morocco’s “STEM” curricula for middle school. 

Under Objective Two, Bridge will help the MEN advance the reform of its STEM curricula for 
grades 7-9.8 USAID is not the only donor supporting this massive effort. MEN partner JICA is 
providing the technical expertise for the reform and piloting of the curricula in math. The MEN 
itself is providing the technical expertise for the reform and piloting of the curriculum in 
technology. The Bridge implementing partner’s efforts therefore will focus on: a) providing 
technical assistance for the overall coordination of the STEM reforms, to ensure maximum 
complementarity across curricula developed and tested9, and b) leading the working groups and 
piloting process for the reform of the science curricula (life/earth sciences, and physics/chemistry). 
In regard to the science curricula, and in accordance with the findings of a study USAID 
commissioned on the quality of the current middle school curriculum, the Bridge implementing 
partner will work to: a) strengthen links across the grade levels of the science subjects, b) 
incorporate reflective practice, reasoning and analytical skills, and c) close gaps between curricular 
documents, teachers’ guides, and student textbooks. Any and all approaches to accomplish these 
aims are acceptable to the MEN and USAID. 

8Note that work under this sub intermediate result is anticipated to take place entirely in French. 

9 
The overall coordinator provided through USAID’s assistance will coordinate with his/her Moroccan counterparts to ensure, to the extent possible 
that the curricula in all of the STEM subjects use similar, evidence-based, problem-driven approaches to science, math, and technology instruction. 
The coordinator and the different curricular design teams would also be expected to work with the Academy Science et Technique to successfully 
implement these curricular revision activities. 

Applicants are encouraged to propose effective and innovative approaches for collaborating 
with the MEN to implement the Bridge pilot to create the most effective STEM middle school 
curricula possible. Detailed data collection on the experience of applying the new Life/Earth 
sciences and Physics/Chemistry curriculum in the pilot schools should inform work to scale 
up the curriculum in the out years of the Bridge program. 

All curricula drafted in the course of this activity should provide initial indications as to how 
learning for students with disabilities and how gender equity can be addressed. These can then be 
further concretized in the development of materials for the respective grade levels and subjects. 
The MEN and USAID have agreed on the following calendar for the piloting and revisions of all 
new middle school curricula and materials: 

 

 

2022 

2022-2023 

2023-2024 

2024-2025 

2025-2026 

2026-2027 




7th-9th grade 
curriculum 
reform 

Preparations; 
Arabic, English, 
and Science 
Curricula 
working groups 

Pilot and 
monitoring; all 
subjects 7th grade 

Pilot and 
monitoring; 
all subjects 
8th grade 

Pilot and 
monitoring; 
all subjects 
9th grade 

 

Revisions and 
final 
refinements to 
curriculum 
and materials 

Ministry-led 
Scale Up 

 

 

7th grade 

8th grade 

9th grade 



 

As was true for the upper primary levels, Bridge also offers a unique opportunity to improve 
assessment practices in grades 7-9 in all critical subject areas (including math), both at the 
classroom and at the systems levels. Under Objective Two, Bridge will strengthen the capacity of 
local stakeholders and system actors to evaluate and analyze students’ performance in Arabic 
(reading), English, math, and science in these grades. Activities to achieve this improvement in 
capacity could be similar to those listed in the table on page 7 for work on assessment in the upper 
primary grades. Applicants are encouraged to demonstrate how they will work with the MEN 
to develop a holistic and comprehensive approach to improving middle school assessment, 
and to pilot that approach in the Bridge lower secondary/middle schools. The ultimate results 
of these efforts should be: readily accessible information on grades 7- 9 student performance in 
Arabic (reading), math, and science (at least in the 60 pilot schools), and personnel and institutions 
able to continue to produce and publish this information after the close of Bridge. 

 

3. Objective Three: Enhance the Moroccan Education System’s Preparedness to Scale 
Up Successful Practices in these Subject Areas and Grades 

Objective Three focuses on data collection and systemic planning and intervention beyond the 
classrooms of the Bridge pilot schools. Under this objective, the Bridge partner(s) will accomplish 
tasks that “pave the way” for successful scale-up of the interventions and curricula trialled under 
objectives one and two. 

Policy Studies and Reform: Under this objective, the Bridge implementing partner will 
collaborate with the MEN to review, and, as need be, update plans and policies that have to be 
firmly in place in order for a successful scale up of piloted and proven interventions. These include, 
but are not limited to policies about: a) language of instruction for STEM in middle school 
(including whether this should be either French or English), b) the production, distribution, and 
replacement of books and materials (the analysis of which may benefit from a supply chain 
analysis), c) procurement and use of technology (which likely should be studied before a full-scale 
expansion of the STEM innovations in the curriculum), d) teacher recruitment and professional 
development for critical subject instruction in upper primary and middle school, and e) national 
level student assessment and data analysis in the Bridge target subjects and grades. Applicants may 
also wish to consider how policy reform related to financial planning and budgeting might be 
required in order to best prepare the MEN and education system as a whole for a scale-up effort 
for Bridge interventions. USAID anticipates setting an annual “policy analysis” agenda with the 
MEN and the Bridge team over the life of the Bridge program, to ensure that planning for scale-
up and sustainability of Bridge activities is underway from the outset of the award. Applicants 
are encouraged to propose an effective process for this annual policy analysis agenda-setting 
that will identify and address the biggest policy barriers to successful scale-up of the Bridge 
reforms. 

Capacity Measurement and Improvement in Non-Bridge Regions: Sustaining a system-wide 
reform to impact student outcomes requires a high level of capacity. Central directorates have to 


be able to provide vision, direction, and supervision. AREFs have to be able to provide 
coordination and regional implementation. Provincial directorates have to be able to provide 
technical support and direction to schools. Schools have to be able to coordinate and implement 
with their teaching staff. While piloting of key interventions is occurring in the Bridge regions, in 
select non-Bridge regions the program will provide capacity assessment services to the MEN to 
help the Ministry identify where its own personnel and practices need reinforcement in order to 
adopt and sustain the “Bridge” reforms. And, as the scale-up of the middle school reforms 
continues, Bridge implementing partner staff will provide the training of trainers in all twelve 
AREFs per subject and grade level to catalyze the roll out of the new middle school curricula and 
materials. Detailed annual plans for this capacity building will need to be established between the 
Bridge team, the MEN, and USAID to ensure that it is taking place from the inception of the award. 
Applicants are encouraged to propose an effective process for this annual capacity building 
planning that will leverage proven tools and metrics to measure and improve institutional 
capacity. By the close of the program, a detailed picture of the MEN’s capacity to sustain the 
upper primary and middle school instructional reforms should be available, and trainers from 
across the twelve AREFs should be ready to roll-out the full scale up of all the Bridge interventions 
in grades 4-9 nationwide. 

Development of Distance Learning Strategies for Supplementing Arabic, English, Math, and 
Science Instruction: In a post-COVID, climate-stressed environment, it will be difficult for the 
MEN to reach all its potential upper primary and middle school learners without utilizing distance 
learning. In order to prepare for scale-up of the Bridge interventions, the Bridge team has an 
opportunity to use the “Toolkit for Developing a Comprehensive Strategy for Distance Learning” 
recently produced by USAID to support the MEN in making a long-term plan for delivering 
distance learning in the key subject areas addressed under Bridge. This work could include: a) 
Reviewing past and present distance learning initiatives and lessons learned, including vis-a-vis 
the use of the ASAFER platform and the i-Takwine platform, b) Identifying potential current and 
possible future distance learning partners and opportunities, c) Developing and validating a 
comprehensive distance learning strategy for student instruction in upper primary and middle 
school. Applicants are encouraged to propose an effective 5-year process for the 
development and eventual start-up of this comprehensive distance learning strategy. 

 

VII. Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 

As a “proof of concept” design, Bridge offers rich opportunities for data collection on the efficacy 
of both products and processes. USAID anticipates a need for internal monitoring and evaluation 
based on the indicators included in the table below and anticipates conducting a process evaluation 
of the program’s implementation, conducted by Bridge, as well as an impact evaluation restricted 
to components of the Bridge pilot schools interventions conducted by an external evaluator 
contracted by USAID. The applicant is expected to rigorously evaluate the effectiveness of the 
developed models. Data related to activities and services provided under Bridge, should not only 
be disaggregated by sex but should demonstrate how the interventions have positively/qualitatively 
impacted the beneficiaries according to their respective gender. The indicators should also be 
disaggregated by youth age groups, urban/rural, and disability, as feasible. 

Required Indicator 

Indicator 
Type 

Program Level/Inputs 

Percent of USG-assisted organizations with improved 

Outcome, 
standard 

Goal Level. Analysis of the functionality of the AREFs, provincial 
directorates, and schools working with the program in the pilot zones 
should contribute data to this indicator 




performance (CBLD-9)10 

Percent of learners receiving USG assistance with improved 
proficiency in a Bridge program key subject (disaggregated by 
subject, grade level, gender, ability, rural/urban) 

Outcome, 
adapted/custom 

Obj. 1 & 2: Relies on collection of data on student performance in 
Bridge pilot upper primary and lower secondary schools 

Percent of education institutions (national departments and 
regional academies) using national-approved benchmarks 
effectively to measure student progress 

Outcome, 
adapted/custom 

Obj. 1 & 2: Relies on collection of data about institutions’ abilities to 
assess students in key Bridge subjects. Approximately one third of the 
work under each of these objectives is targeted towards improving 
assessment. Intensive work with AREFs and provincial directorates to 
analyze the middle school pilots and to improve evaluation systems 
will contribute to these indicators. 

Education data system strengthened through USG assistance 

Outcome, 
supplemental 

% of participants in USAID-sponsored training who 
demonstrate improved instructional practices, based on 
criterion-based assessments (custom) 

Outcome, 
adapted/custom 

Obj. 1 & 2: Data on teacher practice in the target subject areas and 
pilot schools will provide the information for this indicator. 

Education system strengthened through USG-assisted policy 
reform (new standard) 

Outcome, 
supplemental 

Obj. 1, 2, 3: The development of the new curricula and materials, as 
well as the proposals for general policy improvements that are 
anticipated under Obj. 3, will contribute towards this indicator. 

# of learners in primary schools or equivalent non-school 
based settings reached with USG education assistance 

Output, standard 
(ES1.3) 

Obj. 1: Students in the pilot school zones would be counted towards 
this indicator whenever they were involved in the grade 4-6 pilots. 

# of learners in secondary schools or equivalent non-school 
based settings reached with USG education assistance 

Output, standard 
(ES.1-4) 

Obj. 2: Students in the pilot school zones using the new grade 7-9 
curricula would be counted towards this indicator. 

# of educators who complete professional development 
activities with USG assistance 

Output, standard 
(ES.1-6) 

Obj. 1, 2, 3: Staff trained to implement the program in the pilot zones 
would be counted towards this indicator, as would staff trained under 
the capacity building efforts under objective three 

# of education administrators and officials who complete 
professional development activities with USG assistance 

Output, standard 
(ES 1-12) 

 

Obj. 1, 2, 3: Staff trained to implement the program in the pilot 
zones would be counted towards this indicator, as would staff trained 
under the capacity building efforts under objective three 

Number of persons trained with USG assistance to advance 
outcomes consistent with gender equality or female 
empowerment through their roles in public or private sector 
institutions or organizations. (GNDR 8)11 

Output, 
supplemental 

Obj. 1, 2, 3: Staff receiving gender-specific training related to 
program implementation would be counted towards this indicator, as 
would staff trained under the capacity building efforts under objective 
three 



10 
DDI/EDU is funding the development of sectoral guidance for this indicator: https://www.edu-links.org/resources/pirs-cbld-9-improved-performance 

11 
Other applicable indicators for work in gender can be found at: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/205.pdf 

 

Applicants are encouraged, as a function of their designs, to propose other indicators as 
appropriate for the monitoring and evaluation of the Bridge program. All indicator and 
program data should assist the MEN, USAID, and the Bridge partners to collaborate, learn and 
adapt (CLA) together to create the most effective curricula and interventions possible in the 
chosen subject areas for grades 4-9 in the pilot schools. The Implementation research conducted 
throughout Bridge should focus on the questions of (a) effectiveness of the Bridge interventions 
in producing improvements in instruction and student learning, (b) implementability within 
existing systems of interventions, (accounting for system constraints), and (c) cost of different 
models/approaches, to provide necessary data for future planning and implementation at scale by 
the MEN. As the MEL and CLA plans are developed, USAID may request inclusion of additional 
indicators, such as ES.1-2 ; ES.1-45-CUST (representation of diverse populations), ES.1-5-CUST, 
and STIR 10 (Number of innovations supported through USG assistance). 

 

In addition to indicator-based M&E and a robust CLA effort, the program will develop and 
implement a Learning Agenda to explore additional parameters and questions relative to the 
eventual success of the scale-up of interventions. Under this learning agenda, partners could help 
the MEN and USAID to, for example: a) identify effective strategies for system-wide and donor-


wide collaboration that can be taken to scale to facilitate curricular reform; b) identify strategies 
for involving parents, communities, and civil society in reforms; c) identify strategies for involving 
Moroccan youth;, and d) identify strategies for transitioning training on all new curricula into the 
appropriate portions of the new B.A. teaching degree funded by USAID under the HEP-M program 
(refer to this link. Applicants are encouraged to propose priority items for a learning agenda 
which afterwards can be examined, revised, and eventually adopted by the MEN, USAID, 
and the Bridge team. 

 

VIII. Award Administration 


 

The authorizing legislation for this award is the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, and 
it will be subject to 2 CFR 700 - and 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost 
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards. 

 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by USAID 
to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development Objectives. 
Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” and “Project” as 
used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and implementation of USAID 
development assistance. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

Subject to the availability of funding and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID/Morocco intends 
to provide $25,000,000 in total USAID funding and anticipates supporting one (1) Cooperative 
Agreement over the course of five (5) years pursuant to this notice of funding opportunity. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five (5) years. The estimated start date will be 
upon the signature of the award, which is anticipated on or about March 28, 2022. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

Consistent with 2 CFR 200.24 Cooperative Agreement and the USAID Automated Directive 
Services (ADS) 303.3.11 Cooperative Agreements and Substantial Involvement, USAID/Morocco 
anticipates having substantial involvement throughout the implementation of the USAID Bridge 
to Middle School Activity. 

 

USAID has designated an Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) for this cooperative 
Agreement. The role of the AOR is to assist in the programmatic monitoring and administration 
of the award. 

 

The Agreement Officer (AO) may delegate the approval listed in the items below to the AOR, 
except for authority to change the program description, the period of performance, the approved 
budget, and key personnel that require AO approval. 

USAID’s substantial involvement under the award is expected to be as follows: 

1. Approval of Annual Implementation Plans (i.e., workplans); 
2. Approval of the detailed Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL Plan); 
3. Approval of Key Personnel and any changes in Key Personnel; and 
4. Approval of the Recipient’s subawards, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.308(c)(6), managed 
through the award. 


 

4. Title to Property 


 

Property title under the resultant agreement shall vest with the recipient in accordance with the 
requirements of 2 CFR 200.310-316. 

 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 


 

The geographic code for this program is 937 (the United States, the recipient country, and 
developing countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is 
a prohibited source) for the procurement of commodities and services, per ADS 310.3.1.1. 


 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 

transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Bridge to Middle 
School Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. 

 

The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program 
objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of 
sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal 
funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and 
conditions of the Federal award. The Recipient, using its own unique combination of staff, 
facilities, and experience, has the primary responsibility for employing whatever form of sound 
organization and management techniques may be necessary in order to assure proper and efficient 
administration of the resulting award. 

 

7. Other Information 


 

Award will be made to a responsible Applicant(s) whose Concept Paper and Full Application best 
meet the requirements of this NOFO and the selection criteria contained herein. Issuance of this 
NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government, nor does it 
commit the Government to pay for costs incurred in the preparation and submission of a Concept 
Paper or Full Application. In addition, final award of any resultant award cannot be made until 
funds have been fully appropriated, allocated, and committed through internal USAID procedures. 
While it is anticipated that these procedures will be successfully completed, the potential applicant 
is hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for award. The Application is submitted at 
the risk of the Applicant; should circumstances prevent an Award from being made, all preparation 
and submission costs are at the Applicant's expense. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION C: CONCEPT PAPER ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted, except individuals and governments. 

 

The Applicant must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation 
processes, internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established 
U.S. Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will be subject 
to a positive risk assessment by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

A positive risk assessment means that the applicant possesses or has the ability to obtain the 
necessary management competence to plan and carry out the assistance program to be funded, 
and that the applicant will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds 
and other assets provided by USAID. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 


 

There is no cost sharing requirement anticipated under this award. 

 

3. Fee/Profit 


 

While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not 
to award Fee/Profit to prime recipients and subrecipients under assistance instruments. 
However, while Fee/Profit is not allowed for sub-awards, the prohibition does not apply when 
the recipient acquires goods and services in accordance with 2 CFR 200.317 -326, 
“Procurement Standards.” Forgone profit does not qualify as cost-share. 

 

4. Limitations on submissions 


 

Concept Paper 

Each applicant is limited to one Concept Paper submission under this NOFO as the prime 
Applicant. There is no limitation on being included as a potential sub-awardee across multiple 
applications. The use of exclusive teaming arrangements is discouraged. 

 

Full Application 

The Full Application shall be submitted by invitation only. USAID/Morocco will issue a 
Request for Application (RFA) with complete instructions for the submission and review 
process to the Apparently Successful Applicant. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION D: CONCEPT PAPER SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr. Zachary Clarke 

Regional Agreement Officer 

USAID/MERP 

zclarke@usaid.gov 

 

The Point of Contact (POC) for information on this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Salya Yacoubi 

Supervisory Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Morocco 

syacoubi@usaid.gov 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and 
any subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All Concept Papers must be 
submitted according to instructions contained in this NOFO. 

 

In order to maintain a fair and transparent funding opportunity, USAID maintains strict 
guidelines on who within USAID may be contacted regarding applications or questions 
about the opportunity. Applicants may only contact USAID via the email address provided 
in this NOFO. Failure to comply with the USAID points of contact guidance mandated in 
the NOFO may disqualify the Applicant(s). 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions and requests for clarification regarding this NOFO should be submitted by email 
to syacoubi@usaid.gov with a copy to usaidmoroccocontracts@usaid.gov no later than the 
date and time indicated on the cover letter. The subject line must read “Bridge to Middle 
School 72060822RFA00001”. 

 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on 
www.grants.gov, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack 
of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov 
for any amendments. 

 

3. Concept Paper Applicants responsiveness 


 

All Concept Papers received by the closing date and time will be reviewed for 
responsiveness to the specifications outlined in these guidelines and the Concept Paper 


application format. Section E: Concept Paper Review Information addresses technical 
merit review criteria. Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of 
this NOFO. Failure to do so may lead to the disqualification of a Concept Paper. It is the 
Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and 
received on time. 

 

No addition or modifications will be accepted after the submission date. PDF documents 
are the preferred file format, though MS Word documents will be accepted, if necessary. 

 

4. Application Process 


 

In accordance with 5 CFR 1320, which implements the Paperwork Reduction Act, USAID 
requires an electronic submission of the application. 

 

USAID/Morocco will follow a three-phase process. Additional information about each 
phase is provided below: 

 

Phase 1: Concept Paper 

Participation in Phase 1 is mandatory. Failure to participate in Phase 1 will preclude further 
consideration of the Applicant. Phase 1 will be the Concept Paper submission only. The 
Concept Paper is a reduced and condensed format of application with a reduced number of 
pages and Annex requirements, as compared to the Final Application. If submissions 
exceed the page number limitations, only the pages up to the limit will be reviewed, and 
pages exceeding the limit will not be considered. Initial Applications that do not meet the 
requirements of this NOFO will not be considered. 

 

USAID will acknowledge the submission of Concept Papers within three (3) business days 
and will review Concept Papers against the merit review criteria detailed in the NOFO. 

 

The deadline for submission of Concept Papers is November 22, 2021 at 4:00 PM. 

 

Concept Paper submission 

 

A Concept Paper is a short document in which the applicant(s) provides an overview of its 
idea, following the requirements stated below. Further guidance on format of the Concept 
Paper is included at the end of this section and a Concept Paper template is also provided 
(See Attachment 2). 

 

USAID/Morocco anticipates two possible results from the Concept Paper merit review 
process: 

 

● Identification as the Apparently Successful Applicant - Invited for Co-Creation: 
The applicant that submits the most highly rated Concept Paper (i.e. the Apparently 
Successful Applicant), as determined by the review of the Concept Papers, will be invited 
to participate in Phase 2, the co-creation process. If the co-creation process is successfully 
concluded, USAID/Morocco will request submission of a full application. 


● Rejection: If the Concept Paper is not the most highly rated, it will not be considered 
further. USAID/Morocco will reject the Concept Paper and will send a letter of notification 
to the applicant ending its participation in this NOFO process. 

 

Concept Paper Format and Content 

 

This section presents guidance for the structure of the Concept Paper. To facilitate the 
competitive review of the Concept Papers, USAID/Morocco will only consider Concept 
Papers conforming to the format prescribed below. 

 

Concept Papers MUST be written in readable English and submitted electronically via e-
mail in Microsoft Word and/or Adobe PDF. Concept Papers shall not exceed seven (7) 
pages, using standard pages (i.e., A4 size paper), one-inch margins with 12-point font. 
Applicants must use the template attached to this NOFO (see Attachment 2). Clarity and 
specificity are important as is ensuring that the Concept Paper narrative addresses the 
points USAID/Morocco will use to review the Concept Paper (outlined in Section E of this 
document). During the Concept Paper merit review process, USAID/Morocco is likely to 
reject those Concept Papers that are vague or merely restate NOFO language. The 
approximate page lengths are provided as a rough guide and are not mandatory, as long as 
the entire Concept Paper does not exceed 7 pages. When a Concept Paper has more than 7 
pages, the additional pages will not be evaluated. Figures, graphics, and tables may have 
less than Times New Roman 12-point font and must be easily legible. 

 

Any Concept Paper not adhering to the format in Attachment 2 will not be evaluated. Any 
additional information or reference material pages not requested by the NOFO may be 
removed prior to evaluation and may adversely affect an applicant’s evaluation/review. 

Note: If a Concept Paper submission includes any proposed resource or technical partners, 
USAID/Morocco may meet, at its sole discretion, with the Concept Paper Applicant and 
any proposed resource or technical partner(s) to understand their role in the activity. 

 

The Concept Paper and all required supporting information should be submitted by email 
to Salya Yacoubi at syacoubi@usaid.gov with a copy to 
usaidmoroccocontracts@usaid.gov as specified on the cover page of this document. The 
email subject line should follow this naming scheme: “Applicant Organization Name - 
Bridge to Middle School Concept Paper Submission”. No additions or modifications will 
be accepted after the submission date. Concept Papers that are submitted late or incomplete 
will not be considered for the co-creation phase. 

 

USAID/Morocco will acknowledge receipt of Concept Papers submission. 

 

Phase 2: Co-creation 

Co-creation is a design approach that brings people together to collectively produce a 
mutually valued outcome, using a participatory process that assumes some degree of shared 
power and decision making. Co-creation is a time-limited and highly participatory process 
where partners, potential implementers, and end-users define a problem collaboratively, 
identify new and existing solutions, build consensus around action, and refine plans to 
move forward with programs and projects. Under this NOFO USAID/Morocco intends to 


apply a co-creation approach that involves discussions with applicants selected for Phase 
2 to inform the final program description and other sections of the award, as needed. 

 

Selected applicants will be invited by the Agreement Officer (AO) or his representative 
from USAID/Morocco to a co-creation workshop. Participation in the Co-creation process 
is mandatory for the applicant prior to submitting the Full Application. 

 

Other participants in the co-creation process may include: USAID, JICA, the MEN, 
potential private sector partners, and other donors and stakeholders. 

 

Phase 3: Request for Application (RFA) 

Upon completion of the co-creation process, USAID/Morocco will issue a Request for 
Application (RFA) with complete instructions for the submission and review process to the 
Apparently Successful Applicant. 

 

The full Application will include two parts: a Technical Application, primarily consisting 
of a detailed Program Description, and a Business (Cost) Application. 

 

Note: Request for Full Application is NOT a commitment to funding. USAID/Morocco 
reserves the right to make no award under this RFA at any stage of the process at no 
cost to the USG. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION E: CONCEPT PAPER REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Concept Paper Merit Review Criteria 


The Concept Paper Merit Review Criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements 
of this particular NOFO. The Applicant should note that these criteria serve to: 

(a) identify the significant matters which the Concept Paper Applicant should 
address in the application, and 

(b) set the standard against which the Concept Paper will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be 
evaluated by a Merit Review Committee (MRC) using the ratings described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 
a) Rating 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review of Concept Papers received that comply with the 
instructions in this NOFO. The Concept Papers will be reviewed and evaluated using 
an adjectival rating system (Exceptional, Very Good, Satisfactory, Marginal, 
Unsatisfactory) in accordance with the definitions below: 

 

 

Adjective 

Merit Review Criterion 

Exceptional 

An Exceptional Concept Paper has the following characteristics: 

• A comprehensive and thorough Concept Paper of exceptional 
merit. 

• Concept Paper meets and fully exceeds the Government 
expectations or exceeds NOFO objectives and presents very low 
risk or no overall degree of risk of unsuccessful performance. 

• Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that may 
exist. 

Very Good 

A Very Good Concept Paper has the following characteristics: 

• A Concept Paper demonstrating a strong grasp of the objectives. 

• Concept Paper meets NOFO objectives and presents a low overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 

• Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that exist. 

Satisfactory 

A Satisfactory Concept Paper has the following characteristics: 

• A Concept Paper demonstrating a reasonably sound response and a 
good grasp of the objectives. 

• Concept Paper meets NOFO objectives and presents a moderate 
overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 




• Strengths outweigh weaknesses. 

Marginal 

A Marginal Concept Paper has the following characteristics: 

• The Concept Paper shows a limited understanding of the 
objectives. 

• Concept Paper meets some or most of the NOFO objectives, but 
presents a significant overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 

• Weaknesses equal or outweigh any strength that exists. 

Unsatisfactory 

An Unsatisfactory Concept Paper has the following characteristics: 

• The Concept Paper does not meet the NOFO objectives or requires 
a major rewrite of the Concept Paper. 

• Present an unacceptable degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 

• Weaknesses demonstrate a lack of understanding of the 
Government’s needs. 

• Weaknesses significantly outweigh any strength that exists. 

 



 

b) Merit Review 


 

The Concept Papers will be reviewed in accordance with the three (3) merit review 
criteria set forth below. 

 

 Each of the merit review criteria is equally important: 

 

(1) The degree to which the applicant demonstrates ability to iteratively develop 
and test interventions for efficacy and effectiveness in a country context similar 
to Morocco. 
(2) The degree to which the applicant outlines a coherent, feasible, context-
appropriate, evidence-based, efficient, and innovative approach to 
accomplishing all three objectives of the Bridge program. All three objectives 
are of equal importance, and the applicant’s approach should elucidate and 
build upon the logical connections between the three, and should demonstrate 
how, based on the applicant’s intervention, the MEN will achieve increased 
capacity to scale up the proven Bridge interventions according to the calendars 
outlined. 
(3) The degree to which the applicant’s approach is likely to achieve measurable 
progress against the required indicators, and to support collaborating, learning, 
and adapting, and cross-cutting issues such as gender, technology, private 
sector engagement and climate change. 


 

 


 

3. Anticipated Announcement and Federal Award Dates 


Based on the NOFO issue date and considering that no submission extensions will be 
granted, and no delays in the review/evaluation process, USAID anticipates having an 
award in place by March 28, 2022. 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE IS LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, the potential applicant is hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the 
expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred 
before receipt of either a fully executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the 
Agreement Officer. 

 

The Cooperative Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document, which 
shall be transmitted to the Recipient for countersignature to the authorized agent of the successful 
organization(s) electronically. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The Agreement Officer will use applicable policies and standard provisions in the administration 

of the resulting award. No deviations are currently contemplated to the standard provisions for the 
Cooperative Agreement resulting from this NOFO. The standard provisions to be used will be the 
Mandatory Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-governmental Recipients or the Mandatory Standard 
Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Recipients. 

 

For U.S. organizations, the resulting federal award will be administered in accordance with the 
following policies and regulations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and ADS 303maa, Standard 
Provisions for U.S. NGOs are applicable. For complete copies of 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, 
please also see ADS 303.4. 

 

For non-U.S. organizations, ADS 303mab, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. NGOs will apply. 

 

This NOFO only contains provisions that are required at this stage. Final provisions will be 
incorporated in the final award as applicable to the selected Recipient. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

Program Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. All written 
documentation must be submitted in professional-level English. The reports listed below are the 
initial reports that USAID anticipates requiring from the successful recipient. Based on the 
evolving nature of the agreement, USAID may provide modified reporting requirements. 

 

Note: USAID’s fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30. Four fiscal quarterly 
periods begin on October 1, January 1, April 1, and July 1. 

 


a. Financial Reporting: 


 

Financial Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

 

Quarterly Financial Report: Quarterly Financial Reports shall be due within 30 days following 
the end of each quarter corresponding to USAID’s fiscal year from October 1 through September 
30. 

 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.327, Standard Form 425 (SF-425) and SF-425A are used to report 
accrued expenditures. Reporting periods are calendar quarters. Quarterly financial reports are due 
no later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter (January 30, April 30, July 30, and 
October 30). 

 

Quarterly Accruals Reporting: Accruals are the estimated cost of the liability recognized during 
the period for goods and/or services received but not disbursed, or goods and/or services invoiced 
but not recorded. 

 

USAID performs a quarterly accrual exercise at the end of each quarter; i.e. December 31, March 
31, June 30, and September 30. The Recipient is expected to submit four quarterly accrual 
expenditures reports 15 days before the end of a quarter per year. The Recipient must submit a 
spreadsheet showing cumulative disbursements and estimated (un-disbursed) accruals to the AOR. 

 

Final Financial Report: The Final Financial Report shall be due within 90 days following the 
expiration of the award. Financial Reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700. USAID requires 
recipients to use the Standard Form 425 or Standard Form 425a, Federal Financial Report, or such 
other forms authorized for obtaining financial information as may be approved by OMB. 

 

Financial reports shall be submitted as follows: Financial Analyst, Office of Financial 
Management (email: RabatFM@usaid.gov ) and the AOR. 

 

Foreign Tax Reports: Reporting of foreign taxes under this agreement shall follow the standard 
provision entitled “Reporting Host Government Taxes (December 2014)” of this award document. 

 

Host government taxes are not allowable where the Agreement Officer provides the necessary 
means to the recipient to obtain an exemption or refund of such taxes, and the recipient fails to 
take reasonable steps to obtain such exemption or refund. Otherwise, taxes are allowable in 
accordance with the Standard Provision, “Applicability of 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 (December 
2014),” and must be reported as required in this provision. 

 

The Recipient must include this reporting requirement in all applicable sub-agreements, including 
subawards and contracts. 

 

b. Performance Reporting and Plan Requirements: 


 

The Recipient shall be responsible to USAID/Morocco for all matters related to the execution of 

the agreement. Specifically, the Recipient shall report to the Agreement Officer (AO) and to the 
Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), who will be designated by the AO prior to award. 


The Recipient will be expected to provide the following reports. All approved quarterly, annual 
reports, implementation plans, MEL plans, and technical reports shall be posted to the 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) as appropriate. 

 

All reports listed below shall be submitted by the specified due dates, electronically via email for 
approval by the USAID AOR unless otherwise agreed upon with the AOR. Recipients will consult 
the AOR on the format and expected content of reports prior to submission. The Recipient should 
always be ready for revision in program indicators and reporting requirements. 

 

All reports listed below shall be submitted by the specified due dates, electronically via email for 
approval by the USAID AOR unless otherwise agreed upon with the AOR. The Recipient will 
consult the AOR on the format and expected content of reports prior to submission. The Recipient 
should always be ready for revision in program indicators and reporting requirements. 

 

 

TYPE OF REPORT 

DUE DATE (Counted from 
Effective Award Date) 

DISTRIBUTION 

Quarterly Performance 
Reports 

 

Within 30 calendar days after 
the end of each quarter. 

[English and a summary in 
Arabic, soft copy] 

AOR or A/AOR. 

Acceptance will be 
provided in writing after 
AOR review and revisions 
made by Recipient. 

Annual Implementation 
Plan 

Within 60 calendar days of the 
date of award. By September 15 
of each subsequent year. 

[English and Arabic, soft 
copy] 

AOR or A/AOR. 

Approval will be provided 
in writing after AOR review 
and revisions made by 
Recipient. 

Grants Manual 

Within 90 calendar days of the 
date of the award 

[English, soft copy] 

AOR or A/AOR and AO 

 

Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning Plan (MELP) 

A full MELP is expected to be 
submitted within 90 calendar 
days of the date of award. 
Updates to the MELP will be 
submitted by October 30 for 
subsequent years. 

[English, soft copy] 

AOR and A/AOR. 

Approval will be provided 
in writing after AOR review 
and revisions made by 
Recipient. 




Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) Reporting 

Twice annually as part of the 
2nd Quarterly Performance 
Report and the Annual Report. 

Geospatial (geo-referenced) 
data will be submitted or 
updated for each project site. 

[English, soft copy] 

AOR and A/AOR 

Approval will be provided 
in writing after AOR review 
and revisions made by 
Recipient. 

 

Environmental Mitigation 
and Monitoring Plan 
(EMMP) 

With submission of the first 
Annual Implementation Plan, 
within 60 calendar days of the 
date of the award. 

Updated and submitted at least 
once per year using 
USAID/Morocco’s template. 
[English, soft copy] 

AOR and MEO (Mission 
Environment Officer). 

Approval will be provided 
in writing after AOR and 
MEO review and revisions 
made by Recipient. 

Gender Analysis and 
Action Plan 

Within 90 calendar days of the 
date of award. 

[English, soft copy] 

AOR or A/AOR. 

Acceptance will be 
provided in writing after 
AOR review and revisions 
made by Recipient. 

Final Report 

90 calendar days after 
completion of the award. 

[English and Arabic, soft 
copy] No page limit. 

AOR, AO and DEC 
(Reference to M.21) 

AO approval after AOR 
review and approval after 
revisions made by 
Recipient. 

Closeout/Demobilization 
Plan 

120 calendar days prior to 
award completion date. 

Approved, in writing, by the 
AO. 

Other Reporting 

Submitted upon request 

[English/Arabic, soft copy] 

AOR 

Project Fact sheet 

Submitted 90 days after award 
using the USAID/Morocco 
template. It will then be updated 
at least quarterly. 

[English/Arabic] 

 

AOR 




Highlights & Success Stories 

Submitted regularly during the 
project lifetime, and at a 
minimum three highlights 
and/or success stories per each 
quarter. 

[English] 

AOR 

Reporting reference in Standard Provisions 

Reporting of Foreign Taxes 
– Reference to RAA13. 
Reporting Host Government 
Taxes 

The recipient must annually 
submit a report by April 16 of 
the next year. 

FMO/AOR/AO 

Participant Training 
(TEAMS) 

Within 30 days after the end 
of each Federal Fiscal year 
quarter. Recipient is 
responsible for submitting data 
into TEAMS directly. 

[English] 

AOR, A/AOR and Mission 
R-2 Verifier 



 

The Recipient will allow at least 10 business days for review and comments from the AOR on any 
draft report submission. All reports and plans are subject to written approval by the AOR, except 
for the Closeout Plan and the Property Disposition Plan, which are subject to Agreement Officer’s 
approval. 

● Quarterly Performance Reports: 


The Recipient will report performance progress for the program under the award and 
monitor and track indicators as reviewed and agreed to with USAID on a quarterly basis, 
by submitting a quarterly report. Quarterly performance reports will be submitted 30 
calendar days after the end of each quarter and contain the following information: 

 

(1) A comparison of actual accomplishments with the goals and objectives established 
for the period, including up-to-date figures for indicators identified in the Monitoring, 
Evaluation & Learning Plan (MELP). Whenever appropriate, and the output of programs 
or projects can be readily quantified, such quantitative data should be related to cost data 
for computation of unit costs. 

 

(2) Reasons why established goals were not met, if appropriate. 

 

(3) Other pertinent information including, when appropriate, analysis and explanation of 
cost overruns or high unit costs. 

 

A general quarterly performance report template, in addition to the indicator reporting, 
will be provided by the AOR. The Recipient must submit via email a copy of quarterly, 


annual, and final performance reports to the AOR in accordance with 2 CFR 200.328. 
The Quarterly Performance Plan must be in English and a summary must be submitted 
in French and/or in Arabic. 

 

The timing, format and other instructions will be agreed by the AOR and the Recipient’s 
Key Personnel at the outset of implementation. 

 

● Annual Implementation Plan: 


 

Submitted annually to the AOR for approval, the first Implementation Plan, including 
activity planning and timeframe, is due 60 calendar days of the date of the award. For 
the subsequent years, the implementation plan will be submitted for approval by 
September 15 of every year. The plan shall include subcontract and sub-grants planning. 

 

Annual Implementation Plans are to be submitted in English and French to the AOR and 
Alternate AOR via email. 

 

● Grants Manual: 


 

The Recipient shall submit a Grants Manual to the AOR and the Agreement Officer 
within 90 days of the date of the award. 

 

● Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MELP): 


 

 The applicant will be responsible for developing and tracking activity targets, outputs 
and impact, and overall activity indicators in the application which gauge individual 
program activities and program effectiveness. Within 90 days following the award, the 
implementing partner must submit the first annual implementation plan. In addition to 
the initial implementation plan, the recipient will develop and submit a Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning Plan (MELP). The MELP must adequately track and document 
progress against activity components. The MELP also reflects the award progress over 
the life of the program and is a critical tool for planning, managing, documenting, and 
evaluating performance. The MELP will be reviewed and validated annually and revised 
if appropriate. 

 

The Recipient shall submit the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 
within 90 days of the date of the award to the AOR for approval. It is the AOR 
responsibility to review, collaborate on any necessary changes and finally approve the 
MELP. An updated MELP report is due by October 30 of every year. The performance 
year is identified as October 1- September 30 of each year. 

 

Indicators: The applicant’s MELP shall propose indicators that are realistic, attainable 
and that will be effective as guides to management and reporting; and explain how the 
MELP will be implemented and applied as a management and evaluative tool. The 
following indicators, should be taken into consideration (at the CDCS IR level as well as 
at the Bridge to Middle School Activity objective levels): 

 

For each indicator, the MELP must include a Performance Indicator Reference Sheet 
which provides a precise definition, information on disaggregation, the data source, 


frequency of data collection, collection method, the party responsible for data collection, 
when baseline information will be collected, and expected annual/outyear targets. 
Indicators should be disaggregated by gender, youth age groups, urban/rural, and 
disability, as feasible. 

 

USAID’s website contains further background on USAID’s MEL approach as well as 
more detail on developing a MELP. 

 

In line with the Agency’s recent directives on agency-wide implementation of the 
Development Information Solution (DIS), USAID/Morocco will likely transition to the 
DIS during the life of this activity, potentially in the first or second year of 
implementation. In anticipation of this transition, the Recipient should review publicly 
available information 

(https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/resources-for-partners/development-information-
solution) and be prepared to transition to data entry into the DIS should it be required by 
USAID in the future. 

 

The Recipient is responsible for oversight of the operations of the supported activities. 
The Recipient must monitor its activities under this Agreement to assure compliance with 
applicable Federal requirements and performance expectations are being achieved. 
Monitoring by the Recipient must cover each program, function, or activity. Events may 
occur between the scheduled performance reporting dates that have significant impact 
upon the supported activity. In such cases, the Recipient must immediately notify the 
AOR and the AO as soon as the following types of conditions become known: 

 

❖ Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will materially impair the 
ability to meet the objective of the award. This disclosure must include a 
statement of the action taken, or contemplated, and any assistance needed 
to resolve the situation. 


 

❖ Favorable developments which enable meeting time schedules and 
objectives sooner or at less cost than anticipated or producing more or 
different beneficial results than originally planned. Notifications must 
include a statement of actions taken and / or any assistance needed to resolve 
the situation. 


 

● Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Reporting: 


 

The Implementation Plan will also apply geospatial methods using Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) technology to support USAID’s effort to incorporate 
geographic data and analysis into USAID’s overall development planning, design, and 
monitoring & evaluation. The Recipient is not expected to purchase or utilize GIS 
software unless it is relevant for implementation of their activities. The Recipient can 
utilize any of the GIS tools publicly available. When geographic data is acquired through 
data use or ownership agreements with the host-country government or other entity, the 
Recipient must ensure that the agreement makes it permissible for the geographic data to 
be submitted to, and used by, USAID and other U.S. Embassy agencies. Please refer to 
the USAID link for more details. 

 


The Recipient shall provide geographic location or coordinate data twice annually as part 
of the 2nd Quarterly Performance Report and the Annual Report for all USAID-
supported sites as follows: 

 

A. Activity Location Data 

The Recipient must collect and submit Activity Location Data (ALD) and Location of 
Intended Beneficiaries according to the following four requirements: 

 1. Level of Geographic Detail 

At a minimum, the location(s) where the activity is implemented must be collected 
at the Exact Site Level, unless otherwise specified by USAID. The Location of the 
Intended Beneficiaries shall be collected at least at the Administrative Unit 1 Level 
(i.e., Region), and where possible/appropriate at the Administrative Unit 3 Level 
(i.e., Commune) or at the Administrative Unit 2 Level (i.e., Province). 

 2. Activity Location Data Collection Standards 

Activity Location Data must be collected according to the standards provided by 
USAID, such as the use of standard names, boundaries, and locations in Latin script. 

 3. Activity Location Data Submission Method and Frequency 

Activity Location Data must be submitted twice annually as part of the 2nd Quarterly 
Performance Report and the Annual Report to an Agency approved reporting tool 
or in a digital format according to the standards and procedures provided by USAID. 
If the Activity Location Data has not changed since the previous data submission, it 
must be indicated when the data is submitted. 

 4. Activity Location Data Risk 

Activity Location Data must exclude personally identifiable information. If the 
Activity Location Data collected by the Recipient requires protection from 
unauthorized access to mitigate data risk, the Recipient must notify USAID before 
submitting the Activity Location Data to USAID and implement mitigation 
techniques to protect the data from unauthorized access in consultation with USAID. 

 

 B. Geographic Data Assets 

Geographic data assets are primary or derived data assets that are developed or utilized 
during a project. All geographic data assets must be submitted in accordance with the 
special clause or provision “Submission of Datasets to the Development Data Library 
(DDL)” per ADS 302.3.5.21. 

 

NOTE: Activity Location Data (ALD) and geographically disaggregated indicators are 
not considered geographic assets. ALD should be submitted as reported in accordance 
with section “A. Activity Location Data” sub-section “3. Activity Location Data 
Submission Method and Frequency” above. 

 

1. Geographic Data Files 

a. Both primary and derived Geographic Data Files must be submitted. 

b. Geographic Data Files must be submitted in Shapefile (.shp), GeoTIFF (.tif), CSV 
(.csv), or GeoJSON (.geojson) file formats. 


c. In addition to fulfilling the submission requirements noted above, Geographic 
Data Files that are stored in other file formats that may be useful to end users can be 
voluntarily submitted in those file formats. For example, Geographic Data Files 
stored in a File Geodatabase (.gdb) or as a Web Map Service (WMS) can also be 
submitted. 

d. Geographic Data Files that are stored in Shapefile (.shp) or GeoTIFF (.tif) formats 
will include metadata that follows ISO 19115 using the ISO 19139 XML 
implementation schema. 

e. Geographic Data Files that are stored in a CSV or GeoJSON format and contain 
latitude/longitude coordinates will include supplementary information regarding the: 

1. Method used to create the latitude/longitude coordinates; 

2. Spatial reference used to generate the latitude/longitude coordinates; and 

3. Geographical precision of the latitude/longitude coordinates using the 
International Aid Transparency Initiative standards. For example, a 
latitude/longitude coordinate may represent an exact location, the center of a 
populated place, or the center of a subnational administrative unit. This 
information must be included in addition to the actual CSV dataset. 

f. Geographic Data Files that are stored in Shapefile (.shp), GeoTIFF (.tif), or 
GeoJSON (.geojson), JSON (.json) file formats will use the Geographic Coordinate 
System World Geodetic System 1984 (GCS WGS 1984) spatial reference. If the use 
of a different spatial reference was required for an analysis, the spatial reference that 
was used must be indicated elsewhere in the metadata. 

2. Geographic Data Processing and Analysis Files 

a. Geographic Data Processing and Analysis Files that are written in programming 
languages will include a description of the language they are written in (e.g., a Python 
file would be .py, a Javascript file would be .js, etc.), the intended purpose of the file, 
use limitations, and execution instructions. 

b. Geographic Data Processing and Analysis Files will include descriptive comments 
and relative pathnames to enable efficient and effective use by an end user. 

c. Geographic Data Processing and Analysis Files are stored in an online repository, 
such as GitHub, these files can also be submitted as a clone of the repository. 

3. Geographic Data Visualization Files 

a. Geographic Data Visualization Files created using desktop GIS software will be 
submitted in Esri Map Document (.mxd) or QGIS Project (.qgs) file formats. 

b. Geographic data visualization products that are finalized in separate desktop 
software or stored in a different file format can also be submitted if they may be of 
use to an end user. For example, when a data visualization product is stored as a Map 
Package or is finalized in Adobe Illustrator, the Map Package (.mpk), or Adobe 
Illustrator (.ai) file can be additionally submitted. 

c. Geographic Data Visualization Files written in a programming language and 
used to generate web-based data visualization products will include an indication of 
the programming language (for example, a Python file would be .py, a Javascript file 
would be .js, etc.) 


d. Geographic Data Visualization Files will reference relative pathnames to the 
source of all Geographic Data Files that are displayed in the data visualization 
product. 

e. When products created with the Geographic Data Visualization Files are included 
in documents that are submitted to the USAID Development Experience 
Clearinghouse (DEC), such as a report that includes a map created with a Geographic 
Data Visualization File, the URL that links to the location of the document in the 
DEC must be provided. 

 

● Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP): 


 

Submitted annually to the AOR and MEO for approval, the first Environmental 
Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) is due 60 calendar days of the date of the 
award, with submission of the first Annual Implementation Plan. For the following 
subsequent years, the Recipient shall update and submit at a minimum once per year 
using USAID/Morocco’s template. 

 

Refer to Section Environmental Compliance Requirement for complete details. 

 

● Gender Analysis and Action Plan: 


 

The Recipient shall submit a Gender Analysis and Action Plan within 90 calendar days 
of the date of the award to the AOR for approval. 

 

The Recipient will conduct a gender analysis that assesses context and gender gaps and 
needs, including access, time constraints and participation limitations. This analysis will 
inform a subsequent gender action plan, which will be developed in collaboration with 
the USAID management team and finalized within 90 calendar days of the award. The 
gender action plan will inform the Activity’s technical approach as it relates to gender 
throughout the life of the Activity. It also will be used to inform the design of activities 
that seek to reduce opportunity gaps between men and women and or address power 
differentials to promote gender equity. The gender action plans should be developed in 
conjunction with the Activity’s monitoring, evaluation and learning plan, and progress 
should be reflected in annual work plans and performance reports. 

 

● Final Report 


 

The Recipient must prepare and submit the final report required by this Agreement to the 
Agreement Officer’s Representative in English and French within 90 calendar days 
after completion of the award and to the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) 
at http://dec.usaid.gov. 

Refer to Standard Provisions Section M.21 Submissions to the Development Experience 
Clearinghouse and Publications (June 2012). 

The final performance report should contain, but not be limited to the following 
information: 

 

❖ Executive summary 
❖ Describe the methods of assistance used and the pros and cons of these 
methods 



❖ Brief description and mapping of the results of the program 
❖ How this program assisted USAID in meeting targets 
❖ Success stories 
❖ Problems and how they were overcome 
❖ Cost-effectiveness 
❖ Final-year (and/or final fiscal year) as well as cumulative life-of-
activity indicator reporting 
❖ Lessons learned, and 
❖ Recommendations for USAID’s future interventions 


 

● Close out/Demobilization Plan 


 

In order to efficiently close-out this activity and reduce time and costs for both parties, 
USAID/Morocco requests that, 120 calendar days prior to award completion, the 
Recipient shall submit a closeout/demobilization plan for AOR approval. The 
closeout/demobilization plan shall include: 

 

a) a draft property disposition plan, 

b) plan for the phase-out of operations, 

c) delivery schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the 
agreement, and 

d) timetable for completing all required actions in the demobilization plan, 
including the submission date of the final property disposition plan to the 
Agreement Officer. 

 

● Other Reporting 


 

During the life of the award, the Recipient may be required to prepare and submit other 
special reports concerning specific activities and/or analyses as directed by the AOR or 
other USAID Officials in English, French and/or Arabic. These requests will be in 
writing and will specify the due date. 

 

4. Program Income 


 

Program income is not anticipated. 

 

5. Environmental Compliance 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include environmental sustainability 
as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate 
is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/agency-policy/series-200), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. 

Environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are specified in the 
following paragraphs of this NOFO. In addition, the recipient must comply with host country 


environmental regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict 
between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

No activity funded under this NOFO will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 
Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). IEE 
ME 20-73 received concurrence from the Middle East BEO on September 08, 2020, and is valid 
until September 30, 2024, for activities under this NOFO. 

Specifically, the activities envisioned in this NOFO fall into the following classes of action: 

● Education, technical assistance, or training programs except to the extent such programs 
include activities directly affecting the environment (such as construction of facilities, etc.) 
● Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings 
● Document and information transfers 


In case of a sub-grants component, the recipient will be required to use an Environmental Review 
Form (ERF) or Environmental Review (ER) checklist using impact assessment tools to screen 
grant applications to ensure the funded applications will result in no adverse environmental impact, 
to develop mitigation measures, as necessary, and to specify monitoring and reporting. Use of the 
ERF or ER checklist is called for when the nature of the grant applications to be funded is not well 
enough known to make an informed decision about their potential environmental impacts, yet due 
to the type and extent of activities to be funded, any adverse impacts are expected to be easily 
mitigated. Implementation of sub-grant activities cannot go forward until the ERF or ER checklist 
is completed and approved by USAID. The recipient is responsible for ensuring that mitigation 
measures specified by the ERF or ER checklist process are implemented. 

The recipient will be responsible for periodic reporting to the USAID Agreement Officer 
Representative, as specified in this NOFO. 

USAID anticipates that environmental compliance and achieving optimal development outcomes 
for the proposed activities will require environmental management expertise. Respondents to the 
NOFO should therefore include as part of their application their approach to achieving 
environmental compliance and management, to include: 

● The respondent’s approach to developing and implementing an environmental review 
process for a grant fund and/or an EMMP. 
● The respondent’s approach to providing necessary environmental management expertise, 
including examples of past experience of environmental management of similar activities. 
● The respondent’s illustrative budget for implementing the environmental compliance 
activities. For the purposes of this NOFO, applicants should reflect illustrative costs for 
environmental compliance implementation and monitoring in their cost application. 


 As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer Representative and Mission Environmental 
Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned 
activities under this NOFO to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 
216 environmental documentation. 


If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

Any activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 


The Agreement Officer for this Award is: 

 

Mr. Zachary Clarke 

Regional Agreement Officer 

USAID/MERP 

zclarke@usaid.gov 

 

 

The Acquisition and Assistance Specialist for this Award is: 

 

Ms. Salya Yacoubi 

Supervisory Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Morocco 

syacoubi@usaid.gov 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

● USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The 
Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the 
expenditure of public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be 
subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 


 

● Applications with Proprietary Data 


The Applicant who includes data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any 
purpose or used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the 
cover page with the following: 

 “This application includes data that must not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, 
an award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the 
U.S. Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent 
provided in the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s 
right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source 
without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert 
sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the 
following: 

 “Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the 
title page of this application.” 

 

● Other relevant information: 


Links to applicable regulations and references: 

- Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) / Systems for Award Management (SAM) 

http://www.dnb.com and www.sam.gov 

 

- ADS Series 300 Acquisition and Assistance 

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/agency-policy/series-300 

 

● Further background on USAID’s Gender can be found here: 


Gender: Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment and ADS Chapter 205 - Integrating 
Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID's Program Cycle. 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

[END OF NOFO 72060822RFA00001 – AMENDMENT 000001] 

 


