 

Horizontal_RGB_600 


 

 

 

NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY RESILIENT EDUCATION 
FOR CRISIS AFFECTED CHILDREN 

P3TB1#y1 


 

 

 

 

 

USAID/SENEGAL 

SAHEL REGIONAL OFFICE (SRO) 

NOFO NO.: 72068523RFA00001 

November 2022 

 

 



 

Lockup_SENEGAL_RGB_HIGH 


 

 

 

 

 

Issue Date: 11/11/2022 

Deadline for Question: 11/25/2022 

Closing Date: 12/30/2022 

Closing Time: 17:30 GMT 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity#72068523RFA00001 - Resilient Education 
for Crisis Affected Children in Burkina Faso 

 

Program Title: Resilient Education for Crisis Affected Children in Burkina-Faso. 

 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the Resilient Education for Crisis 
Affected Children in Burkina Faso. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO 
thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and 
selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. USAID 
bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. If you 
have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable Unique 
Entity Identifiers (UEI’s) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 


Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part 
of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation 
or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of 
the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

Robert Trimble 

Regional Agreement Officer 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description 

 

 

Section B – Federal Award Information 

 

 

Section C – Eligibility Information 

 

 

Section D – Application and Submission Information 

 

 

Section E – Application Review Information 

 

 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information 

 

 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 

 

 

Section H – Other Information 

 

 

ANNEXES 

 

Annex #1 - Summary Budget Template 

 

Annex #2 - Standard Provisions 

 

Annex #3 - SAM quick start guides for new foreign registration 

 

Annex #4 - SAM quick start guides for new grantee registration 

 

Annex #5 - Past Performance Information 

 

Annex #6 - Abbreviations and Acronyms 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by USAID 
to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development Objectives. 
Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” and “Project” as 
used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and implementation of USAID 
development assistance. 

 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


I. TITLE OF ACTIVITY 

 

Resilient Education for Crisis-affected Children in Burkina Faso. 

 

II. PURPOSE 

 

The purpose of the Resilient Education for Crisis-Affected Children activity is to increase primary 
education completion, particularly for displaced and host community learners who have been 
marginalized due to conflict and crisis conditions, with improved foundational skills and wellbeing, 
even in the face of shocks and stressors. A disproportionate number of Burkinabe primary school-
aged children are unable to complete their primary school education, nor receive quality instruction, 
and therefore struggle to acquire foundational skills. Insecurity, displacement and climate risks 
further exacerbate poor education conditions for both host community and displaced learners. This 
activity has been designed to support the Government of Burkina Faso’s Education Sector Plan 
(2017-2030). 

 

III. BACKGROUND 

 

Burkina Faso is one of seven Sahelian countries classified as fragile by the UN (Brookings, 2020). 
With a population of 20.8 million people, 28% of which is aged 6-15 (AFD, 2021), only 41% of 
the population is literate (50% male, 33% female) (Congressional Research Service, 2020). On 
average, a child in Burkina Faso can expect to complete approximately 6.5 years of schooling by 
the time they turn 18 years old. Yet, given the poor quality of the education system, this same child 
can expect to only learn an equivalent of 4.2 years of education. Significant regional disparities 
exist within these results. In 2017, the UNICEF/UNESCO Out-of-School Initiative estimated that 
approximately 2.6 million children were out-of-school (approximately 51.4% of the school age 
population). This situation has only been exacerbated by insecurity in parts of the country. 

 

Between 2018 and 2020, before the COVID-19 pandemic, Burkina Faso experienced multiple 
shocks of instability including: flooding, food shortage, large influxes of internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) and external migrants from neighboring Mali and Niger, as well as violent 
extremism (UNESCO, 2021). These shocks limited the ability of schools and other education 
facilities to provide consistent education to children in six of Burkina Faso’s thirteen regions: 
Boucle de Mouhoun, Centre-East, Centre-North, East, North, and Sahel. In addition, food insecurity 
and malnutrition are often linked to poor mental and educational development as children reach 
school age and Burkina Faso’s malnutrition rates are high: 15.5% of children are wasted and 34.6% 
are stunted. Finally, a growing youth bulge, combined with poor educational outcomes, perpetuates 
high rates of un/underemployment and poverty—the unemployment rate for Burkinabe urban youth 
aged 15-34 is over 69% while youth under 25 only make up only 8% of the formal working sector. 

 

COVID-19 closed nearly all schools between February 2020 and May 2021. Although facilities 
have since reopened as the COVID-19 situation in Burkina Faso improves, according to the USAID 
Resilience and Economic Growth in the Sahel Accelerated Growth Activity Gender Integration 
Plan (2015), sustained low education rates (for both women and men) in East, Sahel, and Center-
North regions has limited economic opportunities and access to markets in adulthood, and 
prolonged school absences reduce long-term school enrollment and increase the risk that out-of-
school youth are recruited into violent extremist organizations (ACAPS, 2020). 

 


USAID in Burkina Faso 

 

Burkina Faso is a USAID resilience-focus country. To enhance individual, household, and 
community resilience, this activity will complement past and existing USAID stabilization, food 
security, youth and economic growth activities, and layer in geographic areas of implementation. 
The West Africa and Sahel Regional Development and Cooperation Strategy (RDCS), which 
includes Burkina Faso, has a goal of inclusive social and economic development in a more resilient, 
democratic, integrated West Africa. This education activity will align with this objective 
specifically contributing to the Regional Development Objective 4: Vulnerability of Targeted 
Populations Reduced and Intermediate Result 4.2 Economic and Political Drivers of Violent 
Extremism Addressed. 

 

The Activity also advances USAID’s Education Policy priorities below: 

● Children and youth, particularly the most marginalized and vulnerable, have increased 
access to quality education that is safe, relevant, and promotes social well-being. 
● Children and youth gain foundational literacy, numeracy, and social-emotional skills that 
are critical for future learning and success. 


 

 Geographic Scope 

 

USAID/Burkina Faso seeks to support programs that can achieve results under this Activity in 
select urban and peri-urban communities hosting large numbers of displaced learners. The Activity 
will work in the regions of Nord and Centre-Nord with potential for expansion into other regions 
based on needs and operational capacity. To the greatest extent possible, this Activity will be 
layered in communes with other USAID activities and investments in governance, food security, 
and health. To expand the reach of USAID’s support the the Burkina Faso education sector, this 
Activity will be implemented in communes that complement, not overlap with, the Education 
Cannot Wait program implementation zone. 

 

IV. THEORY OF CHANGE 

 

If host community and displaced learners have increased retention in local schools; teachers have 
improved well-being and skills to deliver quality instruction that enhances foundational skills in 
reading, math and well-being; community-based education stakeholders are actively engaged in 
ensuring access to, safety of, and management of local schools; and regional education authorities 
have increased capacity to monitor, analyze, and respond to new crises affecting schools, teachers, 
and learners, 

 

Then, a greater number of host community and displaced primary school-aged children will 
complete primary education with demonstrated foundational skills and improved well-being, even 
in the face of shocks and stressors. 

 

 


Figure 1: Resilient Education for Crisis-affected Children Logic Model 

 

 


V. RESULTS 

 

Through this activity, USAID/Burkina Faso aims to increase the number of host communities and 
displaced primary school-aged children completing primary education with demonstrated 
foundational skills and improved well-being, even in the face of shocks and stressors. To achieve 
this goal, USAID/Burkina Faso seeks to support an activity that can demonstrate improvements in 
four key result areas described below. 

 

USAID intends to measure this goal with the following indicators: 

● Change in completion rate (disaggregated by sex and region) 
● ES.1-2: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain minimum grade-level 
proficiency in reading at the end of primary school 
● Supp-5: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain a minimum grade-level 
proficiency in math at the end of primary school 
● Supp-2: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance with an increase of at least one 
proficiency level in reading at the end of primary school 
● Supp-6: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance with an increase of at least one 
proficiency level in math at the end of primary school 
● Supp-9: Percent of learners with improved social and emotional skills, as locally defined, 
following participation in USG-assisted programs 


 

Result 1: Improved retention of host community and displaced learners in schools 

Over the past decade, Burkina Faso has demonstrated steady progress towards ensuring access to 
quality education for all. Primary gross enrollment has grown from 79.6% in 2011-2012 to 96% as 
of 2018. Unfortunately, indicators of primary school persistence, particularly for girls, have not 
kept pace with this progress, and have, in fact, significantly dropped since 2017. A mix of 
household, community and school-level factors contribute to the poor retention rate experienced by 
learners. In addition, individual dimensions of vulnerability make certain learners more sensitive to 
shocks and stressors that negatively impact their educational trajectories. 

 


This Activity seeks to support programs that address the complex factors that prevent primary-
school children from staying in school. Given education disruptions caused by insecurity, forced 
displacement and COVID-19, USAID anticipates that some students may be struggling to perform 
at grade level and risk falling behind their peers. Various program approaches have demonstrated 
promising results in the identification of struggling learners and deploying school-based 
interventions to help them catch-up. In particular, displaced households may need additional 
support in order to ensure they are aware of education opportunities available to them and have the 
resources needed to access and regularly participate in them. 

 

Evidence demonstrates that crises do not affect all learners equally and specific demographic groups 
are more vulnerable to experiencing education disruptions or learning loss as a result. Barriers to 
regular and sustained participation in education and learning vary across and within communities 
between girls versus boys, children with disabilities, across socioeconomic status, and for displaced 
and host community learners. Therefore, the Activity will support data-driven interventions to 
identify and address household and community barriers to education using contextually-relevant 
and localized strategies. This may include a variety of needs, diagnostic, and situational assessments 
or analyses may be needed both at the outset of the program and on a rolling basis. 

 

USAID recognizes that achieving results in this area will be linked to improved instruction and 
acquisition of foundational skills (Result 2) and to enhanced engagement with community 
education stakeholders (Result 3). 

 

Illustrative Indicators: 

● Retention rate: disaggregated by sex, region, and displacement status 
● ES.1-3: Number of learners in primary schools or equivalent non-school based settings 
reached with USG education assistance 
● ES 1-50: Number of public and private schools receiving USG assistance 
● ES.1-56: Number of learners with improved access to education through USG-assisted 
programs 
● Number of households reached with USG assistance 
● ES.1-51: Number of learning environments supported by USG assistance that have 
improved safety, according to locally-defined criteria 


 

Result 2: Improved well-being and skills of teachers to deliver quality instruction that 
enhances foundational skills and student well-being (reading, math, SEL) 

Recent education sector assessments have noted a deterioration in learning outcomes for basic 
education (2006-2014). Average scores for fifth grade competency levels declined from 45.3 to 
35.4 (out of 100) in French and from 43.8 to 38 in mathematics. Second grade competency levels 
declined from 50.4 to 41.1 in French and from 43.9 to 38.8 in mathematics. The assessments noted 
considerable geographic disparities, and students in urban schools and private schools scored higher 
than the national average. Boys overall scored higher than girls in all subjects at both grades. It is 
therefore not surprising that the Ministry of Education has included in their Education Sector Plan 
a strategic program to improve the quality of learning by enhancing teaching and learning at school. 
Under this Activity, USAID/Burkina Faso seeks to support programs that advance this strategic 
priority, particularly in targeted crisis-affected regions. 

 

In crisis-affected contexts, teacher well-being can be negatively impacted by security threats, 
which also exacerbate household or community stressors. In Burkina Faso, teachers and education 


personnel have been threatened and directly targeted by armed groups. Additionally, teachers areincreasingly called upon to meet the social, emotional and psychosocial needs of learners who 
may have experienced traumatic events orare experiencing distress due todisplacement andincreased insecurity in their communities and homes. Therefore, this Activity seeks to supportprograms that together support teachers’ instructional skills and their wellbeing. USAID supportsand has contributed to avariety of reviews and resource mappingson teacher well-being which 
should inform approaches to achieve results. By supporting teacher well-being and improved 
skills, teachers will be better able to deliver quality instruction in foundational skills and supportthe well-being of learners. USAID anticipates teacher in-service training and continuousprofessional development will be a critical intervention to achieve results under this area.
Coordination and collaboration with the Ministry of Education will be important to ensure teachertraining and continuous professional development contributes to and expands the reach of currentefforts to strengthen teacher training systems. 

In alignment with the USAID Education Policy (2018), this Activity defines foundational skills asliteracy, numeracy, and socio-emotional skills. USAID’sReading MATTERS Frameworkand theUniversal Design for Learning areapproaches that can be used to identify evidence-basedcomponents that arecritical for fostering foundational skills acquisition inall learners. ThisActivity will support programs that areable to leverageand build on investments in teachertraining and curriculum development that have been funded by other donors, including thosesupported by theCompte d’Affectation Speciale du Tresor (CAST). As such, national curriculumreform or textbook development/revision in literacy and numeracy will not be supported by thisActivity.

As needed, this Activity may support additional printing or last-mile distribution of textbooks, 
teaching materials or other supplemental reading, math or socio-emotional instructional materials,
to ensure that learnersand teachers have access to adequate teaching and learning materials in the 
classroom. For socio-emotional skills, this Activity seeks to support programs that have a strong 
contextualized understanding of the current skill frameworks, approaches, and materials and 
evidence-based best practices in school-based socio-emotional learning (SEL) and psychosocialsupport (SeeUSAID’s SEL Toolkit:).

Given the limited resources availablefor this activity, evidence-based selectivity will be needed tofocus investments in areas thatare most likely to drive results in this area and towards the Activity-
level goal of improved primary-schoolcompletion. Wherecontextually valid measures do not existand as needed to measure results under this area, this Activity may support rapid development,
testing, and/or validation of contextualized measures of teacher well-being, student learning, and/orstudent well-being.

Illustrative Indicators

●ES.1-6: Number of educators who complete professional development activities with USGassistance
●Supp-10: Percent of educators providing quality classroom instruction with USG support
●ES.1-1 Percent of learners targeted forUSG assistance whoattain a minimum grade-levelproficiency in reading atthe end of grade 2
●ES.1-48: Percent of learners targeted forUSG assistance with an increase of at least oneproficiency level in reading at the end of grade 2

● ES.Supp-4: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance with an increase of at least one 
proficiency level in math at the end of grade 2 
● ES.1-54: Percent of individuals with improved reading skills following participation in 
USG-assisted programs 


 

Result 3: Increased community engagement in access, safety and, management of schools 

Under this result, USAID seeks to leverage the high value for education embedded in Burkinabe 
society in order to increase community engagement with schools. Unfortunately, in the context of 
Burkina Faso, education is under attack and is being targeted by extremist groups. The ever-
growing body of evidence in education demonstrates that safety in and around schools is a critical 
factor for children and youth to enroll, regularly participate in, complete and learn foundational 
skills in basic education programs. Evidence has also demonstrated that safety is a pre-requisite for 
the acquisition of social and emotional skills. Additionally, insecurity has forcibly displaced large 
numbers of families, exacerbating school crowding in urban and peri-urban areas. Therefore, this 
Activity seeks to support locally relevant and locally-driven strategies to actively engage parents, 
community-based organizations, young people, local leaders, and other education stakeholders in 
the development and implementation of strategies to enhance accessibility of education services, 
particularly for marginalized children, improve safety in and around schools, and to improve 
management and accountability for education delivery. USAID understands that community-
driven actions may need to be focused and/or phased in across these various areas based on local 
priorities and the risks negatively impacting student education outcomes. 

 

During times of crisis, collective actions that bring together host communities and displaced 
communities around a shared value, such as education, can contribute to improved stability, 
cooperation and mitigate risks for intra-communal tension when designed intentionally and carried 
out in a conflict-sensitive way. Where documented needs exist and sufficient numbers of teachers 
are deployed by the Ministry of Education, this Activity may support interventions to increase the 
enrollment capacity of local schools in order to accommodate displaced students and alleviate 
classroom crowding. This may include temporary classroom construction, classroom 
rehabilitation, water and sanitation facilities, classroom equipment (desks, chairs, blackboards), 
double-shifts, or other innovative and community-supported interventions. All interventions must 
be aligned with international and humanitarian minimum standards in school infrastructure, such 
as INEE Minimum Standards for Education in Emergencies and related guidance for community-
based approaches to school rehabilitation. Temporary classroom construction or classroom 
rehabilitation is not to exceed 10 percent of the total activity budget. 

 

In addition, under this Activity USAID seeks to support interventions that apply the best available 
evidence on community engagement to improve the safety of learning environments and contribute 
to improved student wellbeing. USAID recognizes that safety is a prerequisite for learning. In 
addition, communities and young people themselves are best placed to identify the safety risks in 
their communities that prevent children, particularly girls, from staying in school and to develop 
and implement locally-relevant and feasible strategies to reduce those risks. For USAID, safe 
learning environments are free from internal, external, and environmental threats to safety (See: 
www.eccnetwork.net/resources/safer-learning-environments-assessment-toolkit). 


With an understanding that the COVID-19 pandemic and related school closures has likely 
exacerbated education inequity, USAID anticipates that community-led actions may be needed in 
order for learners to return to pre-pandemic levels of education access and learning. Efforts may 


seek to mitigate additional school disruptions, promote implementation or adherence to local public 
health policies and guidance, and/or ensure strategies to address learning loss appropriately target 
struggling and marginalized students. 

 

USAID believes that increased community engagement in local schools will directly support Result 
1 and Result 2, while also contributing to the overall goal of this Activity—improved completion. 

 

 Illustrative Indicators 

● ES.1-13: Number of parent teacher associations (PTAs) or community-based school 
governance structures engaged in primary or secondary education supported with USG 
assistance 
● Supp-7: Number of parents or community members trained to support children’s education 
with USG assistance 
● Number of community-led projects completed with USG assistance 
● Percentage of USG-supported primary schools with increased student enrollment capacity 
● ES.1-14: Number of classrooms built or repaired with USG assistance 


 

Result 4: Increased capacity of regional and sub-regional education authorities to monitor, 
analyze, and respond to new crises affecting schools, teachers, and learners 

In response to the growing insecurity in Burkina Faso, in February 2019 the Ministere de 
l'Education Nationale, de l'Alphabétisation et de la Promotion des Langues Nationales 
(MENAPLN) released its National Strategy for the Education of Students from Insecure Zones 
(2019-2024) (SSEZDS). This has since been updated and provides a strong framework for 
supporting the resilience of the Burkina Faso education system, and ensuring education services are 
responsive to the needs of crisis-affected students, teachers and communities. In order to support 
the implementation of this national strategy, regional, provincial and local education authorities 
must work together in a coordinated effort to monitor, analyze, and report on changing needs, and 
mobilize resources to meet those needs. Therefore, this Activity seeks to support programs that 
improve crisis preparedness, response, and recovery capacities of local education authorities, 
improves coordination of education interventions at the regional and sub-regional levels, and 
contributes to a more resilient and crisis-responsive education system. USAID expects capacity 
building of local education authorities to support and complement investments from other donors 
and investments at the national level. 

 

Illustrative Indicators 

● ES.1-12: Number of education administrators and officials who complete professional 
development activities with USG assistance 
● CBLD-9: Percent of USG-assisted organizations with improved performance 
● Value of additional resources mobilized to respond to educational needs of crisis-affected 
children 


 

Scenario-based Implementation 

Given the known and unknown risks to implementation, USAID expects the Recipient to achieve 
the above results using a scenario-based implementation strategy. Scenario-based implementation 
will allow the Recipient to quickly and nimbly adapt or pivot activity implementation to the local 
needs and respond to the fluid operating environment in Burkina Faso. Implementation strategies 
should be developed for three likely scenarios: security and access to affected populations (1) 


deteriorates, (2) remains unchanged, or (3) improves. Scenarios should include assumptions about 
the impact the operating environment will have on education opportunities and stakeholders. 

 

In the event security improves and access to insecure areas improves, it is expected that local 
schools may re-open, and displaced families and teachers may return to their home communities. 
This may reduce pressure on schools in urban and peri-urban areas and necessitate a change in the 
geographic zone of implementation. Alternatively, in the event security and access to affected 
populations deteriorates, it is possible that families and children flee to safer communities, 
education opportunities close, and availability of teachers diminishes. As a result, different 
strategies will be needed to achieve the above results. 

 

Scenario-based implementation will need to be tailored to the needs and operating environment in 
targeted regions. As such, USAID understands that the package of education services, the type of 
education services, delivery modalities and/or intensity of services may vary from region to region, 
or commune to commune. 

 

VI. MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING 

The Activity will contribute towards the achievement of Regional Development Objective 4: 
Vulnerability of Targeted Populations Reduced and Intermediate Result 4.2 Economic and Political 
Drivers of Violent Extremism under the West Africa and Sahel Regional Development and 
Cooperation Strategy (RDCS), which includes Burkina Faso. 

 

Activity monitoring, evaluation, and collaborating, learning, and adapting (CLA) focuses on 
whether an activity is achieving programmatic results and generating learning to inform the 
adaptation of activities based on evidence. Monitoring, evaluation, and CLA for activities should 
emphasize the systematic process of collecting and analyzing performance data and other 
information to track progress toward planned results. Monitoring and evaluation should influence 
the planning of activities, decision-making and the allocation of resources, and to make changes as 
needed. It also involves collaborating with and across implementing partners to manage the 
relationship among activities to achieve higher-level outcomes. 

 

In a conflict and crisis-affected context such as Burkina Faso, contextual factors and a variety of 
stakeholder perspectives often have a strong influence on activity implementation and performance. 
In order to generate data useful for tracking progress and informing design or implementation 
decisions, monitoring, evaluation, and CLA, activities should use complexity-aware approaches. 
For more information on USAID’s approach to complexity-aware monitoring, see USAID’s 
Complexity Aware Monitoring Discussion Note. In particular, the use of recurrent monitoring 
surveys or rolling assessments may be helpful if existing analyses indicate that there are significant 
changes in displacement, food security, safety, or other contextual factors throughout the year. 

 

The Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP) must define a sound and 
realistic approach for assessments, monitoring, evaluation, and learning, specifically demonstrating 
a capacity to maintain key data collection efforts even when geographic access is limited. The plan 
itself must be practical and efficient, leveraging existing data as much as possible. The plan will 
report on a manageable number of output and outcome indicators, using Standard Foreign 
Assistance Indicators whenever possible. 

 


Assessments. The AMELP should describe when assessments will be used to guide decision-
making. Assessments are learning exercises that can describe the complexity and nature of the 
scenario as well as provide data that describe the gap between what is needed to achieve the 
intended results and what currently exists. They differ from monitoring data in that they are 
collected at a single point in time, and should be used strategically either at the start of an activity, 
or at critical points during implementation (e.g., a significant context change that has impacted 
operations or needs at a large scale). There are four types of assessments that may be needed to 
generate data to inform the design and implementation of this activity: 

 

1. Learning assessments: Since the overall purpose of this activity is for children to complete 
primary education with demonstrated foundational skills, it will be necessary to conduct 
assessments of literacy, numeracy, and social-emotional skills. Contextually-relevant 
learning assessments and tools, such as the Early Grade Reading and Math Assessment 
instruments (EGRAs and EGMAs), may need to be updated or adapted for this purpose, 
rather than developing new assessment tools and frameworks. The Recipient will be 
expected to conduct baseline and formative annual assessments of literacy, numeracy, and 
social-emotional skills of learners. The Recipient will need to work with national education 
authorities to determine appropriate benchmarks of learning in reading and mathematics at 
the end of the relevant grade levels and the end of primary school. Contextually and conflict-
sensitive methods for conducting learning assessments will be proposed and approved in 
the AMELP. 


 

2. Safe learning environment assessment: The Activity may need to conduct safe learning 
environment assessments at the site level at the start of the activity in order to prioritize 
safety risks with the community. These data should inform tailored safety interventions 
delivered in communities and detailed in the Annual Work Plan. Initial safety assessment 
data will drive the on-going monitoring and evaluation of safety, which will be detailed in 
the AMELP approach. 


 

3. Rapid Education and Risk Analysis (RERA): A RERA provides data about the operational 
environment, the existing sources of resilience that the activity can seek to reinforce and 
grow, and the ways in which the education system and this activity interacts with conflict 
and crisis dynamics in key intervention areas. This rapid analysis provides foundational 
information to ensure that all program activities are conflict-sensitive, gender-sensitive, and 
inclusive. The RERA will inform Annual Work Plans, indicating the need for and relevance 
of proposed interventions, as well as identifying areas for increased risk mitigation efforts. 
The RERA should also inform the design of the complexity-aware, context monitoring 
approaches and the approach for collecting beneficiary feedback, described further below. 
USAID anticipates the RERA will also inform the community-engagement approaches and 
education authority capacity building interventions. All RERA reports must be made 
publicly available through USAID’s Education in Crisis and Conflict Network and other 
local coordination groups. 


 

4. Needs Assessments: Depending on the availability of comprehensive education needs 
assessment data, the Activity may plan and budget for targeted education needs assessments 
that align to the scope of the award. Needs assessments may cover a range of barriers to 
education, including but not limited to, understanding social, economic, and nutritional 
barriers that could impede activity results. During the course of implementation, a new 



shock or acute crisis may necessitate support for a crisis-specific needs assessment. Needs 
assessments should be conducted in partnership with local education authorities and 
stakeholders in order to support Result 4 of this Activity. All USAID-funded needs 
assessments must be made publicly available through local coordination groups and 
USAID’s Development Data Library. If other stakeholders have completed a recent 
education needs assessment in areas of implementation, then USAID anticipates data would 
be used to inform program expansion and duplication of efforts would not be necessary. 
This may include coordination with USAID’s humanitarian and food security programs and 
their on-going assessment and data collection efforts. 


 

Monitoring. Monitoring data will serve the following purposes: (1) document the progress, quality, 
and performance of the activity against the intended results; (2) document changes in the context 
that will influence implementation or outcomes; and (3) capture beneficiary data that the activity 
must address. 

 

1. Documenting progress, quality, and performance of the activity. As per USAID ADS 201, 
the Activity should use indicators from the USAID Education Reporting Toolkit whenever 
possible to report against outputs and outcomes (See https://www.edu-
links.org/index.php/indicators). This allows USAID to aggregate data above the activity 
level. The toolkit includes Performance Indicator Reference Sheets (PIRS) that provide 
operational definitions, guidance, collection standards, and reporting requirements for each 
indicator. For each indicator proposed, the AMELP will indicate annual targets, plans for 
the determination of baseline values, explanation of the process by which the indicators will 
be tracked, and a description of how data will be used to inform activity management 
decisions. The AMELP should propose output, outcome and impact indicators. Proposed 
indicators should be gender-sensitive and must include the appropriate disaggregation 
including disaggregation by sex, age group, marginalized groups (e.g., learners with 
disabilities, displaced learners), and any other relevant fragility dimension (e.g., by ethnic 
group, religion, or geographical location). USAID will plan to use the following impact 
indicators to manage or learn from this activity; these indicators must be collected and 
reported: 
a. Change in completion rate (disaggregated by sex and region) 
b. ES.1-2 Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain minimum grade-
level proficiency in reading at the end of primary school 
c. Supp-5: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain a minimum 
grade-level proficiency in math at the end of primary school 
d. Supp-9 Percent of learners with improved social and emotional skills, as locally 
defined, following participation in USG-assisted programs 





 

The Recipient must update USAID on activity progress, achievements, and events on a 
regular basis as determined appropriate by the Agreement Officer’s Representative. The 
Recipient is encouraged to accurately promote successes, impact, and achievement for a 
wide audience. The Recipient may be asked to respond to scheduled and ad-hoc requests 
for information and reporting other than the required reporting specified in Section VI-
Performance Reporting. 

 

2. Documenting changes in the context that will influence implementation or outcomes: 
Context monitoring tracks the assumptions or risks defined in the logic model. In other 



words, it monitors the conditions beyond the Activity’s control that may affect 
implementation. Context refers to the conditions and external factors relevant to 
implementation of USAID strategies, projects, and activities. Context includes the 
environmental, economic, social, or political factors that may affect implementation, as well 
as how local actors, their relationships, and the incentives that guide them affect 
development results. Based on operational experience and/or findings from a contextual 
analysis, like the Rapid Education and Risk Analysis, the Recipient should include in their 
AMELP a limited number of indicators that will be monitored in order to understand how 
the fluid operating environment of Burkina Faso is affecting implementation. Context 
monitoring should form the basis for triggering operational or programmatic pivots 
anticipated as part of scenario-based planning. 


 

3. Capture beneficiary data that the activity must plan to address. Per ADS 201, AMELPs 
must include a description of the Activity’s approach for establishing effective procedures 
for collecting and responding to feedback from beneficiaries, and reporting to USAID a 
summary of beneficiary feedback and how the implementing partner and the Mission 
addressed it. For this Activity, USAID recommends focusing on 2-3 questions at most. 


 

Evaluation. USAID/Burkina Faso may decide to conduct a performance evaluation of this Activity 
or this Activity’s contribution to the Mission’s larger resilience effort. In such a case, the Recipient 
must comply with USAID requirements regarding the evaluation, including selection of 
sites/beneficiaries, collection of data, and work closely with USAID and the Evaluation offeror to 
complete the evaluation. 

 

VII. IMPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLES 

 

A. Conflict Sensitivity 

USAID/Burkina Faso expects partners to take into account conflict dynamics in all activities and 
to demonstrate in their applications how they will do so throughout the implementation of the 
activity. Conflict sensitivity refers to the discipline and capacity of an organization to: 

● Understand the conflict context in which programs are being implemented; 
● Understand how the conflict context might affect programs and how programs might 
affect the conflict context; 
● Act on this understanding to minimize risk of negative impacts on programs (i.e., staff, 
beneficiaries, communities, results) and the conflict dynamics; and 
● Identify options for positively impacting the conflict context. 


 

It is essential that partners implement programming under this award in a conflict-sensitive manner 
with upfront and continuing contextual analysis and monitoring that inform interventions 
throughout the life of the program. The Recipient may use the USAID Rapid Education Risk 
Analysis tool to assist in the initial risk analysis. The tool is available at http://eccnetwork.net/wp-
content/uploads/USAID-RERA-v1.pdf. 

 

Due to the complex environment in which USAID is operating in Burkina Faso, Year 1 of the award 
is intended to be a refinement period for the Awardee to develop a more nuanced understanding of 
the evolving environment and refine the activity accordingly. 

 


B. Resilience 

Learners, their families, teachers, and communities in the target localities for this Activity 
experience repeated, often life-threatening, shocks and stressors that interfere with their ability to 
attend and complete school. Partners implementing programming under this award will need to 
consider how to leverage USAID’s guidance on increasing resilience in order to assist beneficiaries 
to cope with the multiple threats they encounter to enrolling in, remaining in, and completing 
primary education. USAID’s White Paper on Resilience and Education provides frameworks and 
guidelines for catalyzing education-based actions, such as crisis preparedness activities and 
scenario planning, that can assist learners and their surrounding communities to keep education 
services operational even in the face of the types of violence, natural disasters, and public health 
emergency disruptions common in Burkina Faso. 

 

In applying a resilience framework to this Activity, the Recipient is encouraged to develop feasible 
and appropriate strategies to define, monitor and contribute to learning around how education-based 
interventions build and contribute to improved resilience capacities of people, households, 
communities, and/or education institutions. 

 

C. Equity & Inclusion 

 

Gender Equality and Female Empowerment: Addressing gender barriers in all USAID activities 
is a mandatory requirement, and USAID has identified gender as a cross-cutting theme that is 
built into all USAID activities. USAID’s Gender Equality/Female Empowerment and Evaluation 
Policy’s Guidance is provided in ADS 205. 

 

The Recipient must develop a strategy and carefully monitor activity implementation to ensure that 
girls and boys are equitably benefiting from the interventions administered under this Activity. The 
Recipient must identify and redress gaps when data indicate that girls’ and boys’ needs are not 
being met and barriers to opportunities for girls and boys still exist. Gender analysis must be 
embedded into program planning and other assessment in order to develop contextually-relevant 
strategies and approaches to address gender-differentiated vulnerabilities and risks. Monitoring and 
reporting must include indicators disaggregated by sex and age-range. The Recipient must identify 
gaps where data indicate gender inequities or issues that exacerbate gender equality efforts and 
implement and report on measures to address these as appropriate. 

 

Disability-positive and Inclusive Programming: The USAID 2018 Education Policy promotes the 
inclusion of disabled persons and the educational advancement of people with disabilities. This 
Activity should leverage frameworks such as Universal Design for Learning to promote equitable 
and inclusive access to quality primary education for learners with disabilities. 

 

D. Addressing and Mitigating COVID-19 Impacts 

COVID-19 has led, worldwide and in Burkina Faso, to a regression in literacy skills amongst 
learners and put increasing health-related and economic demands on families, school systems (both 
formal and non-formal), and communities that decrease their focus on providing quality instruction. 
Psychosocial stressors from household job losses and physical insecurity also adversely affect the 
learning readiness of vulnerable groups once they return to education, particularly girls. Addressing 
these additional barriers to learning will require increased investments in social and emotional 
learning and educator/learner well-being. Lessons learned in good public health measures as well 


as pivoting activities to alternative delivery methods may be needed. The Recipient should remain 
in close contact with the AOR to seek appropriate guidance as necessary. 

 

E. Coordination and Collaboration with other USG and Donor Programs 

It is essential that partners coordinate planned interventions under this award with other 
implementing actors in the education sector and across other USG-funded sectors. In particular, 
efforts should be coordinated with other partners working to improve the capacity of education 
authorities to plan, manage and oversee education services that are responsive to the evolving needs 
of the context. In areas where the multi-donor Education Cannot Wait program operates (six 
priority regions have been targeted by the ECW 2021-2023 Multi-Year Resilience Program: Boucle 
du Mouhoun, Centre-East, Centre-North, East, North, and Sahel) , the Recipient should promote 
collaboration and complementarity. Additionally, as there are other donors and actors working on 
these issues, the Recipient should ensure all planned interventions do not duplicate efforts and that 
the interventions are complementary to other ongoing activities, both internal and external to 
USAID. 

 

The Recipient should leverage and align efforts with the ongoing USAID/Burkina Faso activities, 
such as USAID YouthConnect (operating in Ouahigouya in Nord region, Fada and Manni in the 
East region, Kaya, Togouri and Yalgo in the Centre-nord region), USAID’s Resilience Food 
Security activities (operating in the Centre-Nord region), and the USDA McGovern-Dole school 
feeding program. The Recipient may seek to articulate in their AMELP how this Activity 
contributes to resilience-focused outcomes in key zones targeted by USAID/Burkina Faso. 

 

F. Localization 




Local knowledge and capacity exists in Burkina Faso to address key development challenges, 
particularly in the education sector. USAID/Burkina Faso is committed to localization and shifting 
more leadership, ownership, decision making, and implementation to the Burkinabe people and 
Burkinabe institutions. The Recipient should build localization into the Activity from the start, with 
a commitment to harnessing and building local capacity through key personnel filled with local 
experts and local organization serving as sub-recipients as appropriate. 

 

VIII. CRISIS MODIFIER 

Burkina Faso is subject to shocks and stresses such as droughts, floods, insect invasions, diseases, 
market volatility, price and currency fluctuations, political instability, and violent conflict. Because 
this Activity will have experienced staff with local knowledge, relationships, and specialized 
expertise, and because this Activity will have a pre-approved Shock Response Contingency Plan, 
the activity will be able to respond to many of these shocks more quickly than a new partner could. 
Similarly, a number of other USAID implementing partners also have the award flexibility to help 
respond to localized or widespread shock events. 

 

The $3 million unfunded crisis modifier provision in the award, when activated by USAID, 
authorizes the Implementer to incur costs under the activity line item entitled “Crisis Modifier” in 
response to a shock, crisis, or ongoing stressor. USAID may also choose to use the modifier to scale 
up responses to address worsening security situations, to meet new education and protection needs 
of host-community and displaced children and youth, and to sustain education outcomes. Activities 
to be funded under the crisis modifier are pre-approved by USAID through the Shock Response 
Contingency Plan, which is an addendum to the Annual Work Plan, and will be selected based on 
a crisis-specific and geographically-focused rapid needs assessment. In the event that the shock or 


stressor, or the appropriate shock response, is not included in the pre-approved Contingency Plan, 
the Implementer must prepare a concise supplement to the Contingency Plan that describes the 
shock or stressor (if it is new), the trigger thresholds, and the proposed responses. USAID must 
approve the revision to the plan prior to authorizing the use of the Crisis Modifier. The Crisis 
Modifier provision is activated upon receipt of a written instruction signed by the Agreement 
Officer stating that “the Crisis Modifier provision is hereby activated.” The Crisis Modifier can be 
activated as many times as is determined appropriate by USAID/SRO. 

 

In case of a shock or worsening stressor, the Implementer should first consult with USAID on 
response possibilities in line with the content of the Contingency Plan, and then send a formal 
request to activate the crisis modifier. The request should describe the proposed actions, 
beneficiaries, geography, and timeline and include the required budget for the response and pipeline 
analysis and expenditures forecast to the end of the fiscal year for the entire activity. This will help 
to determine if additional funds are needed beyond what has already been obligated. The request 
must include two options 1) adding additional funds needed to cover the cost, 2) if additional funds 
are not available from USAID, what currently planned activities would be reduced to free up 
resources for the response. USAID will respond as to whether additional funds are available, and/or 
what current activities should be reduced to allow for the response. If changes are made to that 
year’s planned activities, the Implementer must formalize the changes by submitting a revised 
Annual Work Plan within 30 days of the Crisis Modifier being approved by USAID. 

 

The Shock Response Contingency Plan must be developed during the first six months of the 
Activity and informed by a Rapid Education and Risk Analysis or other readily available situational 
risk analyses. The Plan must be reviewed each year as part of the annual work planning process and 
updated as required. Trigger thresholds for the most significant potential shocks that affect the 
viability of Activity interventions will be established in the Contingency Plan. These triggers are 
meant to provide an earlier and more objective indication of when the Implementer and USAID 
need to consider activating the Crisis Modifier. However, the Implementer and USAID can consider 
activating the Crisis Modifier at any time, even if a trigger threshold is not crossed. Design and 
management of contingency plans may include consultation with USAID’s Bureau of Humanitarian 
Assistance to ensure coordinated disaster preparedness and response efforts among different 
activities in the region. 

 

The Implementer should be prepared to activate the Crisis Modifier in Burkina Faso quickly, if the 
need should arise. If the Crisis Modifier line item is not used, or is not necessary, USAID and the 
partner may agree to expend those resources on other aspects of the Activity. The Agreement 
Officer will determine at the time whether this requires an agreement modification. 

[END OF SECTION A] 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one (01) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to 
provide 20,000,000.00 USD in total USAID funding over a five (05) year period. The activity will 
be implemented in Burkina Faso. 

 


The total award amount of $20,000,000.00 USD includes a $3,000,000.00 set aside for a crisis 
modifier that allows the Implementer to undertake additional early actions or shock response in the 
event of a projected or current shock. The funding anticipated for this award will come from a 
number of different USAID funding streams. 

 

2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 


 

Through this activity, USAID/Burkina Faso aims to increase the number of host communities and 
displaced primary school-aged children completing primary education with demonstrated 
foundational skills and improved well-being, even in the face of shocks and stressors. To achieve 
this goal, USAID/Burkina Faso seeks to support an activity that can demonstrate improvements in 
four key results. USAID intends to measure this goal with the following indicators: 

 

1. Change in completion rate (disaggregated by sex and region) 
2. ES.1-2 Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain minimum grade-level 
proficiency in reading at the end of primary school 
3. Supp-5: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain a minimum grade-level 
proficiency in math at the end of primary school 
4. Supp-2: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance with an increase of at least one 
proficiency level in reading at the end of primary school 
5. Supp-6: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance with an increase of at least one 
proficiency level in math at the end of primary school 
6. Supp-9 Percent of learners with improved social and emotional skills, as locally defined, 
following participation in USG-assisted programs 


 

⮚ Result 1: Improved retention of host community and displaced learners in schools 
⮚ Result 2: Improved well-being and skills of teachers to deliver quality instruction that 
enhances foundational skills and student well-being (reading, math, SEL) 
⮚ Result 3: Increased community engagement in access, safety and, management of schools 
⮚ Result 4: Increased capacity of regional and sub-regional education authorities to monitor, 
analyze, and respond to new crises affecting schools, teachers, and learners 


 

3. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date will be on/about 
May 2023. 

 

4. Substantial Involvement 


 

Award under this NOFO will be a cooperative agreement. Potential applicants should note that 
USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit to the recipients under assistance instruments. 
Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID will be substantially involved in the implementation of this 
Activity. The intended purpose of the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) involvement 
during the implementation of the program is to assist the recipient in achieving the supported 
objectives. It is expected that the AO will delegate the approvals of items (a) to (c) below to the 
AOR: 

 


(a) Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 

USAID will approve annual work plans and the life-of-project exit strategy, and any 
subsequent revisions. 

 

(b) Approval of Specified Key Personnel 

USAID may designate as Key Personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. 

 

(c) Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 

When the Recipient's successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 
USAID's technical knowledge, the AO may authorize the collaboration or joint participation 
of USAID and the Recipient on the program. The AO may include appropriate levels of 
substantial involvement such as the following: 

 

1) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the program 
will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the Recipient. USAID may 
participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees must only deal 
with programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative matters. 
2) Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards –including subcontracts to 
carry out work of a technical nature under the award (examples include, carrying out a 
study or a training of a technical nature, etc.). 2 CFR 200.308 already requires the 
Recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting 
out of any work under an award. This is generally limited to approving work by a third 
party under the agreement. 
3) Approval of the Recipient's Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 
(AMELP). 
4) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. 


 

(d) Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity 

The AO with the advice of the AOR may immediately halt construction activity if identified 
specifications are not met. 

 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937, 
defined as the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. Procurement of vehicles 
and pharmaceuticals and other restricted commodities are subject to the limitations in 22 CFR 228, 
ADS 312, and ADS 310 and may require a waiver or Agreement Officer’s approval. 

 

For accurate identification of prohibited sources, please refer to 22 CFR 228 and Automated 
Directive System (ADS) 310 entitled “Source and Nationality Requirements for Procurement of 

Commodities and Services Financed by USAID”. 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 


The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Resilient Education 
For Crisis Affected Children in Burkina Faso which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful 
Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the 
efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of sound management 
practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner 
consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the 
Federal award. 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 

 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Qualified U.S. and non-U.S. organizations (other than those from foreign policy restricted 
countries) are eligible to apply under this NOFO. Potential for-profit Applicants should note that, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.400(g), profit, which is any amount in excess of allowable direct and 
indirect costs, is not an allowable cost for Recipients of USAID assistance awards and cannot be 
part of the activity budget. However, the prohibition against profit does not apply to procurement 
contracts made under the assistance instrument when the Recipient procures goods and services in 
accordance with the Procurement Standards found in 2 CFR 200.317 to 326. 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and 
evaluation processes, internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with 
established U.S. Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will 
be subject to a responsibility determination assessment (possibly including a pre-award survey) 
by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is required 
to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective Recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to 
obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial 
assistance on the same basis as any other organization and are subject to the protections and 
requirements of Federal law. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

No cost-sharing is required for this award. 

 

2. Program Income 


 

USAID does not anticipate program income under this award. 

 

3. Other 

 

Organizations may submit only one application under this NOFO. 

 

All applications received by the deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness and programmatic 
merit in accordance with the specifications outlined in Section D below. Applications should 
respond directly to the terms, conditions, specifications and provisions of this NOFO (including all 
portions of the program description). Applications that do not meet the requirements of this 


NOFO will not be considered for award. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Primary: 

 

Name: Hamed Cisse 

Title: Agreement Specialist 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: hcisse@usaid.gov 

Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

Alternate: 

 

Name: Chitahka Floore 

Title: Supervisory Regional Agreement Officer 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: cfloore@usaid.gov 

 Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

Name: Robert Trimble 

Title: Regional Agreement Officer 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: rtrimble@usaid.gov 

 Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the email addresses of the 
primary and alternate agency contacts above no later than the date and time indicated on the cover 
letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will 
be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that 
information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any 
other prospective applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please see 
subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and Business 
(Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only while the 
Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related issues. 


 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application, 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
● Program name 
● Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the issuing 
office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve only 
as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part of the 
merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

A. Be written in English. 


 

B. Be written on 8½”x 11” size paper with at least 12-point Times New Roman font, with at 
least one-inch margins, and be legible. 


 

C. Be single-spaced with consecutively numbered pagination; and 


 

D. If applications contain text boxes, they must be in no less than 10-point font, as to not unduly 
interfere with readability. 


 

E. The technical application must be in a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 


 

F. The Cover Page, Table of Contents, Acronym list, Executive Summary, and 
Attachment/Annexes do not count against the 30-page limitation. Any page in the technical 
application that contains a table, chart, or graph, not otherwise excluded above, is subject to 
the page limitation. 


 

G. All information from attachments/annexes must be referenced in the technical application 
and summarized and included in the attach sections. All critical information from 



annexes/attachment that is clearly identified and summarized in the technical application 
will be evaluated as part of the basis of award. 


 

H. Additional documentation beyond the page limit and the required referenced 
annexes/attachments will not be read or evaluated by USAID. 


 

I. Budget Narrative: Accompanying budget notes/narrative must explain the basis of all unit 
costs in each line item. The explanation must identify the factors upon which each estimate 
is based and show the arithmetic in reaching the cost figure; and 


 

J. The budget should be submitted in MS Excel format (software versions 2003 or newer). 
The Excel spreadsheet cells must be “unprotected” and must not be zipped or “values only” 
formatted in order to allow USAID to view all formulas and calculations by line item. See 
Appendix #1 for a sample Budget Format. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should 
retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 

indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of 
delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to the contacts provided in Section D.1. Please do 

not submit applications through the Grants.gov website. Email submissions must include the 
NOFO number, applicant’s name, and country of implementation in the subject line heading. In 
addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the 
email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their 
attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two 
emails, the first email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], 
[country of implementation] Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application 
into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how 
to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic 
applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email 
to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, 
please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name 
that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless there has 
been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 


Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours 
occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in 
sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government 
infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Senegal Mission cannot 
guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 10MB per email. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The application must contain information that demonstrates the Applicant’s understanding of the 
program description and must be prepared in such a manner as to enable the review committees to 
make a thorough evaluation and arrive at a sound determination of whether the application responds 
to the NOFO. 

 

Unnecessarily elaborate brochures or other presentations beyond those sufficient to present a 
complete and effective application in response to this NOFO are not desired and may be construed 
as an indication of the Applicant’s lack of cost consciousness. Elaborate artwork and expensive 
visual or other presentation aids are neither necessary nor wanted. 

 

The Technical Application should be organized as described below. The content of the application 
should respond to the program description in Section A. 

 

The application must contain the following sections and must not exceed the below page limits, 
for a maximum of 33 pages excluding annexes: 

 

● Cover Page (1 page); 
● Executive Summary (2 pages). 
● Technical Application Body (30 pages); and 
● Required Annexes (no page limitation). 
○ Documentation of partnerships with consortium members, sub-recipients, 
or private sector entities. The documentation should indicate the roles and 
responsibilities of each organization/entity and certify the commitment and 
availability of each organization/entity to perform under the Activity. 
○ Management structure or organizational chart(s) showing staff positions, 
partners, and lines of supervision; and 
○ Resumes & references for all key personnel (two pages per resume only) and 
signed letters of commitment. 





 

The following items are not included in this page limitation: Table of Contents, Acronym list, and 
the executive summary. 

 


If the Applicant includes data that it does not want disclosed to the public or used by the USG for 
any purpose other than for evaluation purposes, it should mark the cover page with the following 
legend: 

 

"This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government and shall 
not be duplicated, used, or disclosed - in whole or in part - for any purpose other than to evaluate 
this application. If, however, an agreement is awarded to this Applicant as a result of this RFA, a 
final determination will be made regarding the extent to which data included in the cooperative 
agreement can be disclosed.” 

 

The Applicant may include any other information or graphics on the cover page that it determines 
are beneficial. 

 

Executive Summary (maximum 2 pages) must present a synopsis of the key elements of the 
technical application. 

 

Technical Application Body (maximum 30 pages) 

 

The purpose of this section is to provide the information necessary to allow USAID to fairly and 
completely evaluate the Applicant under each of the evaluation criteria specified in this RFA. The 
Technical Application Body must include the following sections: 

 

I. Technical Approach, 

II. Management Approach, including Management Plan & Staffing Plan; and 

III. Organizational Capacity & Experience. 

 

Below are further instructions on how the Applicant can demonstrate responsiveness to the 
Selection Criteria through its application: 

 

I. Technical Approach 


 

The Technical Approach must: 

 

● Articulate a clear theory of change that links proposed evidence-based interventions to 
specific, measurable, and achievable activity intermediate and sub-intermediate results. The 
technical approach must describe in some detail the scenario-based set of interventions 
proposed to achieve the activity outcomes and results. The technical approach should 
demonstrate the program’s ability to respond to the education needs in each region in order 
to achieve broad impact. 
● Propose a realistic and achievable scale of implementation based on available resources, 
including the number of schools to be supported, the anticipated number of unique student 
and teacher beneficiaries reached annually and over the life of the Activity, and the number 
of communes The technical approach must also describe the targeted improvement and 
measurement approach for student learning outcomes. 
● Describe the Applicant’s scenario-based implementation strategy. The technical approach 
must describe implementation strategies in the event security and access to affected 
populations in the implementation area (1) deteriorates, (2) remains stable, or (3) improves. 
The scenario-based implementation strategy must describe in some detail how the Applicant 



will adapt to changes in the context or pivot among the proposed implementation strategies. 
The Applicant must describe the key assumptions for each scenario. The scenario-based 
implementation strategy should demonstrate a clear understanding of the conflict dynamics 
and operating environment in the targeted regions of Burkina Faso. 
● Describe an appropriate monitoring and evaluation strategy that balances both the need for 
accountability with the desire to learn and apply adaptive management throughout the life 
of the activity. The monitoring and evaluation strategy should include a clear articulation of 
the complexity-aware monitoring strategies that will be used and the opportunities for 
periodic evaluative and/or learning events to be held over the course of the activity. The 
monitoring and evaluation strategy should also describe a practical approach for monitoring 
how the Activity contributed to improved resilience capacities of people, households, 
communities, and/or education institutions. 
● Describe how the proposed interventions will collaborate with and capitalize on other 
USAID, Government of Burkina Faso, development partners, and local organization 
activities. The Technical Approach should (a) demonstrate a strong understanding of past 
investments in the education sector, (b) awareness of donors’ work in technical areas similar 
and complementary to the proposed scope of this activity, and (c) include strategies for 
promoting collaboration and avoiding overlap or duplication in planned interventions. 


 

II. Management Approach 


 

Overall, the Management Approach should clearly describe how the proposed activities will be 
managed. The Management Approach must include a Management Plan and Staffing Plan 
according to the following: 

 

● The Management Plan must: 


 

○ Describe the management structure that will be put in place to ensure achievement 
of the program outcomes and proposed results, including ensuring equitable gender 
and disability management practices. 
○ Describe the roles, responsibilities and capacity of all partners working on the 
activity, including international, national, local and government partners. Applicants 
are strongly discouraged from requiring local organizations to sign exclusivity 
agreements. 




 

● The Staffing Plan must: 


 

○ Describe the proposed Staffing Plan, including proposed key personnel. The Staffing 
Plan should show sufficient human resources in the technical, monitoring and 
evaluation, managerial, and administrative functions necessary for successful 
implementation. The Staffing Plan should demonstrate cost effectiveness. 
○ Include in an annex an infographic that clearly describes the management structure 
or organizational chart. The proposed organizational structure should provide clear 
lines of management, supervisory authority, and technical responsibility. 
○ Provide a cogent description of the roles and responsibilities of key personnel and 
professional technical staff and advisors. The Staffing Plan should articulate how 
key personnel have the requisite knowledge, skills, experience, and language ability 
to effectively achieve the results and deliverables proposed. 





○ Include in an annex the curriculum vitae (limited to 2 pages per individual) for all 
key personnel proposed using a standard format. The Applicant must also provide a 
written and signed letter of intention from each key personnel indicating his/her: (a) 
availability to serve in the stated position, in terms of the number of days after award; 
and (b) intention to serve for a specified duration. Applicants are strongly 
discouraged from requiring key personnel to sign exclusivity agreements. 




 

III. Organizational Capability and Experience 


 

The Applicant should furnish evidence that it has, along with its proposed major sub-recipients (if 
any), the ability to plan, implement and monitor education activities in crisis-affected regions of 
Burkina Faso, conflict settings or contexts similar to Burkina Faso. The Applicant should discuss 
its track record in managing complex education activities that required substantial and sustained 
collaboration with local and national education authorities, other USAID implementing partners, 
and other education sector actors. If classroom construction or rehabilitation interventions are 
proposed, the Applicant must describe their experience managing and overseeing construction 
activities, including capacity to prevent fraud and corruption, to ensure construction standards are 
met, and to minimize environmental impact. The Applicant must highlight past experience 
demonstrating their ability to address gender issues and inclusive development. 

The Applicant, including all sub-recipients or partners of a consortium, must address relevant 
experience for itself and each major sub-recipient (i.e. a partner whose proposed cost exceeds 20 
percent of the Applicant’s total proposed cost). USAID may give more weight to performance 
information that is considered more relevant and/or more current. 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must illustrate 
the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 














 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 




Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including itemization 
of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise 
inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make award 
and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient 
detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted 
costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. 
The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s 
determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template. 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 



applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, 
and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken 
down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of 
compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used and 
supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an agency 
of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its approval. 
If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose a rate 
and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must 
include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, 
gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as 
company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and 
quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the 
basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and 
reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market 
conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value 
of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as 
the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – If applicable. 


 


7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 
miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant 
should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and 
their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, 
the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the 
applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved 
NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other 
than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the 
Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and 
finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further 
guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct 
costs but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this 
methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a 
non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply 
to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. 
directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non-U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one program 
or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and 
telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current year. 



● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de minimis 
rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional supporting 
information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be under 
consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the applicant’s 
requested method. 

 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● UEI Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) Unique Entity Identifier and SAM Requirements 




 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable Unique 
Entity Identifier (UEI number) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding 
agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 


1. Provide a valid UEI number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 



2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient (SAM.gov) . 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during 
which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a 
Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not qualified 
to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another applicant. 

 

SAM and UEI registration: SAM.gov 

Existing UEI number for those already registered in SAM. 

 
Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM as well as obtaining 
UEI and NCAGE numbers on this Quick Start Guide on this PDF. 

 

f) History of Performance 














 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its cost-
reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, 
not to exceed {5}, as follows: 

 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award Number; 
● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last 3 years; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work 
at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact 
information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 


 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-
award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

g) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 














After technical evaluation of applications for USAID funding, USAID Agreement Officers will 
request Apparently Successful Applicants to submit a Branding Strategy, defined in 22 CFR 226.2. 
The proposed Branding Strategy will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement Officer shall 


review for adequacy the proposed Branding Strategy, and will negotiate, approve and include the 
Branding Strategy in the award. Failure to submit or negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time 
specified by the Agreement Officer will make the Apparently Successful Applicant ineligible for 
award. 

Marking Plan 

After technical evaluation of applications for USAID funding, USAID Agreement Officers will 
request Apparently Successful Applicants to submit a Marking Plan, defined in 22 CFR 226.2. The 
Marking Plan may include requests for approval of Presumptive Exceptions. All estimated costs 
associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, labels, banners, press 
events, promotional materials, and the like, must be included in the total cost estimate of the grant 
or cooperative agreement or other assistance award, and are subject to revision and negotiation with 
the Agreement Officer upon submission of the Marking Plan. The Marking Plan will not be 
evaluated competitively. The Agreement Officer shall review for adequacy the proposed Marking 
Plan, and will negotiate, approve and include the Marking Plan in the award. Failure to submit or 
negotiate a Marking Plan within the time specified by the Agreement Officer will make the 
Apparently Successful Applicant ineligible for award. 

Required communications materials 

In addition to a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan, Awardees will be required to submit the 
following communications materials on a timeline specified by USAID, using guidance explained 
in USAID’s Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide and on 
www.usaid.gov/branding. The following timelines will be adhered to: 

 

A. Within 2 weeks of the award: 

1. Press release - announcement of the award - with feedback from USAID/DOC 


B. Within 60 days of the award: 

1. A Communications Strategy submitted and completed with feedback from USAID/DOC 
and revised annually as the program matures 
2. Activity Fact Sheet (in English and French) completed with feedback from USAID, which 
will be updated annually 


C. Bi-weekly Updates will include: 

1. Links to media coverage of program and activities 
2. Content for social media, with text and captions for photos 
3. Forecast press events, social media coverage and communication products (newsletter, 
video, etc.). 
4. Event plans (in coordination with the USAID/DOC), with social media tool kit. 
5. Post-event write up and social media analysis with photos 



D. Quarterly Reports will include: 

1. One or two success stories submitted with photos (success stories could be submitted also 
at any time) to be edited with USAID/DOC feedback 
2. A pool of selected high-resolution photos showcasing program milestones and 
beneficiaries (all photos with identifiable people will have consent forms signed and 
submitted to USAID). 


 

E. Biannual communications products: 

2. One video (max. 4 minutes) submitted with full involvement of the USAID/DOC – 
including strategizing, storyboarding, script and captions. 
3. Large press event at milestone activities with full involvement of the USAID/DOC. 


 

h) Funding Restrictions 














 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction may be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

i) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 














 

 a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or 
an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in 
the competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after 
submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO 
no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 

 

 b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 


 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing 
for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but 
are not limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access 
to nonpublic information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant 
or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and prescribed 
by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a Selection 
Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

USAID intends to award a single Cooperative Agreement from this NOFO. However, USAID 
reserves the right to make more than one award or no award if determined to be in the best interest 
of the Government. Each application submitted compliant with the terms of this NOFO will be 
reviewed according to the process set forth below. 

 

Committee members will examine the logic, feasibility and appropriateness of the technical 
approach, including responsiveness to cross-cutting themes, indicators and anticipated development 
results or impacts; quality and availability of personnel in response to stated qualifications or 
requirements; and several institutional factors. 

 

After evaluations have been completed, the Agreement Officer (AO), considering the SC review 
and the cost evaluation, will then make the final selection. USAID may engage in discussions or 
negotiations with the Apparently Successful Applicant regarding any matter to be covered in the 
final technical and cost application. USAID may also award without further discussions with the 
selected Applicant. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review on all Applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated according to the following criteria in 
order of importance. 

 

1. Technical Approach 


 

The technical approach will be evaluated on the overall merit and feasibility of the activity 
approach and strategies proposed to achieve the purpose and intermediate results. 

 

The technical approach will be evaluated based on the degree to which: 

❏ Technical Soundness: the technical approach articulates a clear theory of change and 
applies a technically sound, realistic, evidence-based set of integrated interventions to 
achieve results for target beneficiaries, including appropriate strategies to ensure 



adaptability and conflict-sensitivity throughout the life of the activity and to manage 
adaptively. 
❏ Potential for Impact: the proposed program demonstrates the ability to achieve maximum 
impact to increase primary-school completion rates, even in the face of shocks and stressors. 
❏ Monitoring & Evaluation Strategy: reliable and valid measures and methods are applied 
to monitoring, evaluation, and learning that are complexity-aware and appropriate for the 
proposed interventions and implementation strategies. 
❏ Coordination: the proposed program leverages the Government of Burkina Faso, USAID 
and other donor investments to achieve the activity results. 


 

2. Management Approach 


 

The management approach will be evaluated on the overall merit of the Management Plan and 
Staffing plan. The management approach will be evaluated based on the extent to which: 

 

❏ Management Plan: The Management Plan provides a realistic and manageable approach 
to activity implementation across outcome areas, partners, and geographic regions, and 
optimizes the experience, expertise and capacity of each partner. 
❏ Staffing Plan: (a) the Staffing Plan is clear and responsive to the technical, 
monitoring/evaluation, and management needs of the proposed activity, (b) demonstrates 
an optimal use of resources, and (c) the relevance and strength of qualifications and 
experience for proposed key personnel, including technical expertise, adaptive 
management skills, education levels, and number of years of experience. 


 

3. Organizational Capability and Experience 


 

Organizational capability and experience will be evaluated based on the extent to which the 
application demonstrates that it has implemented prior education awards of similar scale and 
complexity. Elements to be considered include the extent to which: 

❏ Organizational Capability: the application demonstrates the organizational capability 
and capacity to plan, implement, flexibly manage, and apply data to adapt education 
programs in order to deliver results in Burkina Faso, conflict and crisis-prone settings, or 
contexts similar to Burkina Faso. 
❏ Experience: (a) the application demonstrates a strong track record in managing complex 
education sector activities that required substantial and sustained collaboration with host 
country government officials and agencies, other USAID implementing partners, and other 
education sector actors; and (b) the Applicant demonstrates the ability to apply gender-
transformative and inclusive development approaches. 


 

b) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial aspects 
of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; (2) 


whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable economy and 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient 
has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial 
resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the 
program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the 
risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with 
“specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following policies 
and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 

For Non-US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

These documents may be accessed through the internet as follows: 

 

● 2 CFR 200: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 


 

● 2 CFR 700: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 
● ADS 303: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf 


 

● Standard Provisions for U.S., Nongovernmental Recipients: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303maa.pdf 


 

● Standard Provisions for non-U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients: 


https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mab.pdf 

 

See Section H, Annex #2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to awards 
resulting from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

● Financial Reporting: 


 

The recipient shall account for expenditures for activities carried out to ensure funds are used for 
their intended purposes. Financial reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 200.327. 

 

(a) Quarterly Report: The recipient will submit an SF 425, the Federal Financial Report, via 
electronic format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.dpm.psc.gov) 


within 30 calendar days following the end of each quarter of the United States Government fiscal 
year. A copy of this form shall be simultaneously submitted to the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) and the USAID/Senegal Office of Financial Management. 

 

(b) Final Report: The recipient will submit within 90 calendar days following the estimated 
completion date of this award the original and three (3) copies of the final Federal Financial Reports 
(SF-425) to: (a) USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMP-LOC Unit; (b) the Agreement Officer, (c) 
Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The electronic version of the final SF 425 will be 
submitted to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.dpm.psc.gov) in 
accordance with paragraph (a) above. 

 

Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: 

https://www.archives.gov/files/nhprc/pdfs/sf-425-fillable.pdf 

 

Line item instructions for completing the SF-425 can be found at: 

https://www.neh.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/sf-425instructions_0.pdf. 

 

● Performance Reporting 


 

The successful Applicant will provide the following reports to the USAID Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) and the Agreement Officer, as specified below, in accordance with 2 CFR 
220.327 and 220.328. The recipient must adhere to all reporting requirements listed below. All 
reports shall be submitted by the due date, drafted using plain English, include very limited use of 
acronyms and initialisms, and adhere to the USAID Style Guide. Additional reports requiring 
review and clearances, when necessary, are listed under each requirement. 

 

A. Quarterly Reports 


 

The recipient must submit quarterly reports, covering each calendar quarter, within thirty (30) 
calendar days following the end of each calendar quarter (i.e. January 30, April 30, and July 30), 
limited to ten (10) pages, not including annexes. The report should include the following 
components: 

 

● Bulleted list of achievements in the quarter (1-2 pages); 
● Background and details of key achievements, identified ‘best fit’ practices, and or lessons 
learned, and observations concerning political economy dynamics, and what they may 
signal concerning programmatic adjustments (4-5 pages); 
● Description of collaborative activities with other USAID implementing partners and/or 
stakeholders (1-2 pages) 
● Key problems or issues encountered, how they were or will be resolved, and any 
recommended programming adjustments. Applicants must be candid about approaches and 
activities that are not yielding progress toward Resilient Education for Crisis Affected 
Children’s objectives. (1 page); and 
● Bulleted list of planned activities for the next quarter with dates and locations for events. 
(1-2 pages). 


 

In addition, the following are required Annexes for the quarterly reports: 


 

● Annex 1: Table of indicators showing progress made during the quarter, cumulative for 
the fiscal year, and cumulative for the life of activity towards set targets. Narrative will be 
provided for each 10% deviation from target. 
● Annex 2: Two ‘stories of change’ with relevant high-resolution photos, a podcast, video 
files, etc. as appropriate (see below for more information) 
● Annex 3: Quarterly Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Report 
● Stories of change1: Each quarter, the applicant must submit at least two stories of change 
that captures important—if subtle—shifts in relationships, group processes, and dynamics. 
These stories may be targeted at different audiences (e.g., GoBF, parliamentarians, youth, 
women, local private sector, U.S. Congress…), and produced in both English and local 
languages. Applicants are encouraged to think creatively about formats (e.g., radio spots, 
short podcasts or videos, blogs), and to co-create these stories with Burkina Faso partners, 
with a special emphasis on hearing the voices of women and youth. 


1 The DFID-funded LASER program offer example of an ambitious results framework that delivers ‘stories of 
change’ at the outcome level, and reports on ‘major and moderate’ results at the output level. 

 

B. Annual Reports 


 

The annual report must include narrative and quantitative sections, and report against all indicators. 
The narrative section is limited to forty (40) pages, not including annexes, and should cover key 
achievements and high level impacts, synergistic results, scalability of results, collaborative 
activities, best practices, lessons learned, challenges encountered, and priorities for the next year. 
Annexes must include: 1) a comprehensive property inventory list 2) reporting against all indicators 
with narrative for each 10% deviation from target, 3) financial table, 4) at least one success story 
with relevant photos, 5) Annual Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Report, 6) Annual Shock 
Response Planning Report and Women Equality and Economic Empowerment 1 pager. The annual 
report shall be submitted on or before the 90th day after the reporting period each year. A French-
language translation (the original report must be in English) of the annual report must also be 
submitted at the same time. The Annex 2 table for indicators must be submitted on or before 
October 15th of each year in order to be included in USAID's annual performance reporting 
requirements. For all results that either exceed or fall short of the annual target by 10% or more, a 
narrative explanation must be included. Please highlight in a different color all indicators that 
exceeded (green) or fell short (red) of their target so they can be easily distinguished from the rest. 
The annual report can also double as the quarterly report for the final quarter of the reporting period. 

 

C. Final Report 


 

A Final Performance Report is due within ninety (90) calendar days after the completion date of 
the award. The final performance report must be submitted to the AOR and the Agreement Officer. 
The draft final report must be submitted thirty (30) calendar days prior to the completion of the 
award. It is highly recommended that the final report be prepared before the end date of the award 
since additional costs cannot be incurred after the end date. This report should not exceed forty (40) 
pages (excluding annexes). 

 

The report should minimally include: 


 

● Executive Summary outlining award accomplishments, results, and conclusions as well as 
recommendations for future assistance; 
● Overall description of activities conducted during the life of the Award; 
● Assessment of progress towards Award objectives along with description of results; 
● Description of collaborative activities with other USAID implementing partners; 
● Description of programmatic impact and sustainability; 
● Description of lessons learned and best practices; and 
● Recommendations for future USAID programming. 


 

This report should not exceed forty (40) pages (excluding annexes). The final performance report 
shall be submitted to the AOR, and the Agreement Officer. The draft final report must be submitted 
thirty (30) calendar days prior to the completion of the award. Awardee will have no more than 
ninety (90) calendar days after the completion date of activities to submit a completed final report 
in English and in French. 

 

In addition, a comprehensive property inventory list is required ninety (90) days in advance of 
award completion. 

 

D. Other Reports 


 

Short-Term Consultant and Technical Reports 

USAID expects regular updates from the Implementer with respect to each short-term consultancy 
procured under this award. Upon completion of the services of each short-term consultant, the 
Implementer must submit a short report to the AOR summarizing the activities, deliverables, and 
recommendations of the consultant no later than 21 calendar days after the completion of the 
consultancy. This can be either in written or verbal form as determined by the AOR. In addition, 
the Implementer shall provide copies of all technical reports including analyses, policy 
recommendations, comparative studies, etc. to the AOR once these are developed. At the time of 
procuring consultants or technical assistance providers, the Implementer should consult with 
USAID regarding the need for French-language translations of any deliverables. 

 

Geographic Information System (GIS) data 

USAID is required to make nonproprietary geospatial data available to the public. Data must be 
consistent with US Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) level 1 metadata standards. 
USAID is in the process of developing standards and protocols for geospatial-related activities with 
mapping specialists for RISE II. The Implementer will be provided a copy of these standards once 
they are developed and will be required to abide by them. Implementers are to work in collaboration 
with these USAID hired mapping specialists and ensure that they have mapping capabilities within 
activity staff or procured through consultants. 

 

All spatial and geographic information system activities financed by USG federal funds must 
comply with: 

a. OMB Circular A-16, Executive Order 12906. 
b. Automated Directives System (ADS) 507 (Freedom of Information Act); 
c. ADS 551 (Data Administration); and 
d. ADS 557 (Public Information). 


 


Therefore, the Implementer must submit to USAID the following one (1) year after the start date 
of the award and on October 30 of each subsequent year: 

 

a. Digital spatial data according to Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) 
Level 1 metadata standards capturing GIS at the regional, administrative, 
commune, and village level for their zones of intervention. 
b. Digital copies of spatial data with accompanying metadata; and 
c. Make spatial data available to the public at the cost of reproduction. 


 

Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) Requirements 

USAID recipients are required to comply with the submission requirements for the Development 
Experience Clearance (http://dec.usaid.gov) pursuant to the Standard Provision entitled 
“Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications (June 2012).” 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR. 

 

E. Annual Work Plans (AWP) 


 

A draft Year One work plan must be submitted to USAID with the application. It will cover the 
first year of performance. For each subsequent program year, the awardee will be required to 
prepare and submit an annual implementation plan by September 1st, 30 days before the beginning 
of the fiscal year that the plan covers. 

 

The workplan will serve as a guide for program implementation. As such, it must demonstrate the 
links between activities and intended results; present a sound basis for budget estimates; and serve 
as the foundation for the monitoring and evaluation plan. The work plan will outline key activities 
and the expected results to be accomplished for that year, including a timeline with relevant 
milestones, tied to the recipient’s Performance Management Plan. A budget with sufficient detail 
to allow the AOR to judge the efficiency of the annual implementation plan must be included. 

 

Shock Response Plan 

The Shock Response Plan is an addendum to the Annual Work Plan that outlines the actions the 
Implementer will take in response to shocks and stresses. The Shock Response Plan should include 
at a minimum: 

 

● Description of the major shocks and chronic stresses that may affect the program 
performance, undo Resilient Education for Crisis-affected Children development gains, and 
harm direct Resilient Education for Crisis-affected Children’ beneficiaries 
● Interventions/strategies to mitigate ongoing stresses and to reduce risks associated with 
shocks (these interventions should also be included in, and implemented, as part of the 
regular Annual Work Plan) 
● Proposed response and recovery activities for each identified shock 
● Trigger thresholds for context indicators that will be used to determine when a shock may 
be occurring (or will soon occur) that requires a response 
● Indicative unit costs for response options to allow for quick budgeting 


 

Bridge partners, RISE II partners, and USAID, facilitated by the Sahel Collaboration and 


Communication activity and the Water Security and Resilience activity, will engage in a 
collaborative process to refine the template for Shock Response Plans and clarify the coordination 
mechanisms in case a shock response is required. 

 

In the event that the shock or stressor, or the required shock response, is not included in the pre-
approved Shock Response Plan, the Implementer must prepare a concise supplement to the Shock 
Response Plan that describes the shock or stressor (if it is new), the trigger thresholds, and the 
proposed responses. The initial Shock Response Plan should be submitted five months after the 
initial award. The Shock Response Plan must be reviewed each year as part of the annual planning 
process and updated as required. 

 

F. Performance Monitoring Plan 


 

The recipient must submit to USAID, with its application, a Performance Monitoring Plan for the 
life of the project. USAID expects that performance measures will objectively assess the progress 
of project activities and their impact. The plan must describe how instruments and schedules will 
be harmonized to support the activity, and USAID’s data reporting needs. The recipient must 
include milestones that set forth the activities/tasks and results that the recipient will work toward 
achieving. The milestones must be clearly defined, readily measurable and linked with the program 
objectives. For each milestone proposed, the recipient will consider how the milestone accurately 
predicts progress towards the achievement of the expected results. 

 

The awardee must use effective and efficient mechanisms to monitor the progress, impact, and 
success of their activities. USAID expects the recipient to be innovative in its efforts to capture, 
document, and report all the outcomes of USAID assistance. 

 

G. Close-out Plan 


 

No later than 180 days before the end of the Award, the Implementer must submit a close-out plan 
that details all equipment and provides a proposed disposition plan according to USAID regulations. 
The Close-out Plan must also specify actions that will be taken to hand over or transition activities 
to other partners, including local communities and governments. The Plan must specify sequencing 
of the closure of offices (if applicable), discuss sequencing of staff reductions, and include a 
communications strategy, activities, and products to highlight Resilient Education for Crisis 
Affected Children accomplishments. 

 

H. Environmental Compliance and Climate Risk Management 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include environmental sustainability 
as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate 
is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), which, in part, require 
that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 
The recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are 
specified in the following paragraphs of this Notice of funding Opportunity. 

 


In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. USAID may in addition require environmental reviews 
or mitigation measures that go beyond those required under local law. 

 

No Resilient Education for Crisis Affected Children activities funded under this cooperative 
agreement will be implemented unless an environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 
CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion 
(RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed 
by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as 
“approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

 

An activity level Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) has been approved for the Burkina 
Faso Resilient Education for Crisis Affected Children Activity Cooperative Agreement (CA). 
The IEE can be found in the Environmental Compliance Database at 
https://ecd.usaid.gov/document.php?doc_id=39306. 

 

The IEE covers activities expected to be implemented under this CA. USAID has determined that 
a Categorical Exclusion applies to the Resilient Education for Crisis Affected Children. This 
indicates that activities under the Resilient Education for Crisis Affected Children are among the 
classes of actions listed in 22 CFR 216.2(c)(2) that generally have no foreseeable significant direct 
or indirect adverse effect on the environment. Therefore, under 22 CFR 216.2(c)(1), neither an IEE 
nor an EA will be required for these activities. Other projects/activities that may arise must be 
subject to an environmental analysis and the appropriate documentation prepared and approved, 
whether it be a new Request for Categorical Exclusion, an amendment, or another type of 22 CFR 
216 document. The recipient shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to 
activities to be funded under this award. 

 

As part of their initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipients, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and Mission 
Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing 
and planned activities under this CA to determine if they are within the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 


If the Implementer plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written 
USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 


Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 

 

Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental mitigation 
and monitoring plan (EMMP) or a mitigation and monitoring (M&M) plan, the recipients shall 
prepare an EMMP or M&M Plan describing how the recipients will, in specific terms, implement 
all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed interventions within the scope of the award. 
The EMMP or M&M Plan shall include monitoring the implementation of the conditions and their 
effectiveness. 


 

The Implementer shall submit a completed EMMP or M&M Plan within 3 months of Award and 
integrate it into subsequent Annual Work Plans, making any necessary adjustments to activity 
implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts to the environment. 


Climate Risk Management 

 

Per ADS 201, a climate risk management (CRM) screening is required for all USAID-supported 
activities, with limited exceptions. Climate risk is the potential for negative consequences on 
activity objectives and/or outcomes due to changing climatic conditions. The focus of climate risk 
management at USAID is on the risk to USAID development programming. The CRM process may 
also identify potential development opportunities associated with current and expected climatic and 
meteorological changes, including chances to achieve additional development objectives (including 
increasing climate resilience and reducing greenhouse gas emissions). 

 

Climate risks can be manifested through potentially severe adverse consequences for development 
programs resulting from the interaction of climate-related hazards with the vulnerability of societies 
and systems. A climate risk may arise when an activity element, target, or beneficiary is exposed 
to a climate hazard such as higher temperatures, flooding or drought. The level of risk increases 
both the severity and probability of negative impact increases. Per USAID policy, moderate and 
high climate risks must be addressed in the activity design and/or during implementation. In some 
cases, the USAID design team may accept a/some risk(s) upon consideration of tradeoffs and how 
USAID can best achieve its development objectives. 

 

An activity-level CRM screening analysis was conducted for the Resilient Education for Crisis 
Affected Children. 

 

Climate risks should be adaptively managed during implementation, which should be reflected in 
the activity’s monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) processes. The Activity should, to the 
extent possible and practicable, utilize USAID’s Guide for integrating Climate Risk Management 
in its MEL planning and implementation. USAID’s Guide for integrating Climate Risk 
Management in its MEL planning and implementation can be accessed at 
https://www.climatelinks.org/resources/climate-risk-management-monitoring-evaluation-
learning-and-knowledge-management. 

 

I. Other Requirements 


 

SUMMARY OF REPORTS/DELIVERABLES 

Report 

Due Dates 

Submission Requirements 

First Year- Draft 
Annual Work Plan 

Submit with the technical application 

Submit electronically with 
technical application 

Annual Work Plan 
(subsequent years) 

Draft due by September 1st, and final 
due no later than October 30th 

Submit electronically to 
AOR 




Performance 
Management Plan 

Submit with the technical application 

Submit electronically with 
technical application 

Environmental 
mitigation and 
monitoring plan 
(EMMP) 

Draft due 3 months after award, final 
version to be integrated in all Annual 
Work Plans and updated as necessary 

Submit electronically to 
AOR 

AMELP 

Submit abbreviated draft with technical 
application, full draft within 3 months of 
award, and final is due within 5 months 
after award 

Submit draft electronically 
with technical application, 
and final to AOR. 

Branding Strategy 
and Marking Plan 
(BSMP) 

Apparently successful applicant to 
submit BSMP before award. 

Within 2 weeks of the award: 

1. Press release - announcement of the 
award - with feedback from 
USAID/DOC. 

Within 60 days of the award: 

1. An activity communications strategy 
submitted and completed with feedback 
from USAID/DOC and revised 
annually as the program matures. 

2. Activity Fact Sheet completed with 
feedback from USAID, which will be 
updated annually. 

Submit BSMP 
electronically as required 
to the Agreement Officer, 
and subsequent documents 
to AOR. 

Short-Term 
Consultant and 
Technical Reports 

• 21 calendar days after the completion 
of the consultancy 

• When completed, submit copies of all 
technical reports including analyses, 
policy recommendations, comparative 
studies, etc. Depending on the 
audience, USAID may require a French 
translation and 508 Compliance. 

Submit electronically to 
AOR 




Geographic 
Information System 
(GIS) data 

Submit to USAID the following one (1) 
year after the start date of the award 
and on October 30th of each subsequent 
year: 

• Digital spatial data according to 
Federal Geographic Data Committee 
(FGDC) Level 1 metadata standards 
capturing GIS at the regional, 
administrative, commune, and village 
level for their zones of intervention. 

• Digital copies of spatial data with 
accompanying metadata; and 

• Make spatial data available to the 
public at the cost of reproduction. 

Submit electronically to 
AOR 

Quarterly reports 
(both financial and 
programmatic) 

30 days after the end of the reporting 
period 

Submit programmatic 
report electronically to 
AOR, and submit SF 425 
to the Department of 
Health and Human 
Services, with a copy to 
AOR and OFM 

Annual reports 

To be submitted within ninety (90) 
calendar days following the end of the 
reporting period. 

Submit electronically to 
AOR 

Close-out Plan 

To be submitted minimum 180-days 
prior to completion date 

Submit electronically to 
AOR and AO 

Final Report 

1. Draft 30 days prior to completion of 
award 

2. Final within 90 days after completion 
date 

Submit a copy 
electronically to AOR and 
AO, and comply with DEC 
submission requirement 



 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

The point of contacts for this NOFO and for any questions during the NOFO process is: 

 

See Section D.1 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all organizations 
who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. 

 

Please visit this page for additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-
assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement Officer 
is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. 
Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of funds and 
continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government 
will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting 
award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained 
in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

List of Annexes 

 

a) Annex #1: Illustrative Budget Template (Attached Excel File) 
b) Annex #2: Standard Provisions 
c) Annex #3: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Foreign Registration 
d) Annex #4: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Grantee Registration 
e) Annex #5: Past Performance Information 


 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

An Illustrative Budget Template (Excel File) is attached to this NOFO. 

 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PREDETERMINED (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PROVISIONAL (Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - 
PROVISIONAL (Profit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

YES 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES 
– SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

NO 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH 
SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 

 

NO 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

NO 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY 
(COOPERATING COUNTRY TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

NO 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

YES 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

 

NO 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

YES 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 




 

NO 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE 
(DECEMBER 2004) 

YES 

 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

NO 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 

YES 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR 
AWARD MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

YES 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

NO 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

 

NO 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

YES 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 

 

NO 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

YES 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 




RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST 
RATE AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 

TBD 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED 
AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

YES 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

YES 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

YES 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR 
TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

YES 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 
2012) 

 

NO 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

NO 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

YES 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

YES 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

NO 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS 
(JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

NO 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 

 

NO 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 

 

NO 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

NO 
NO 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 




PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

NO 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL 
ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

YES 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS 
(April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

YES 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

 


ANNEX #3 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW FOREIGN REGISTRATION 

 

 

 

Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #4 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW GRANTEE REGISTRATION 

 

 

Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #5: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION 

 

1. Award Number: 

 

2. Contractor/Recipient (Name and Address): 

 

3. Type of Award: 

4. Complexity of Work: Difficult Routine 

5. Description, location, and relevancy of work: 

 

6. Dollar Value of Work : Status: Active Completed 

 

7. Date of Award: 

Award Completion Date (including extensions): _____ 

 

8. Type and Extent of Subawards: 

 

9. Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address of the Awarding 
Contracting/Agreement Officer and/or the Contracting/Agreement Officer 
’s Representative (and other references as applicable): 



 

 

 

 


