Issuance Date: August 16, 2022, 4:00pm, South Africa time 

Deadline for Questions: September 6, 2022, 4:00pm, South Africa time 

Closing Date for Concept Paper: September 26, 2022 @, 10:00am, South Africa time 

 

Co-Creation Kick Off Meeting: TBD (October/November 2022) 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72067422RFA00006 

 

Program Title: USAID/Lesotho / Local Entities Advancing and Driving Health Responses 

(LEADR) Activity 

 

Catalog of Federal Assistance Listing (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications from qualified 
entities to implement the Local Entities Advancing and Driving Health Responses (LEADR) activity. 
Eligibility for this award is restricted to local and regional organizations as defined in Section C. 

The total estimated amount is anticipated to be $15 million. 

 

USAID desires to engage in pre-award co-design and make award to the applicant(s) who best meets the 
objectives of this funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to 
a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and 
selection process. USAID strongly discourages the use of exclusive agreements with organizations and key 
personnel as this limits the program’s potential to receive the best services. 

 

If USAID decides to engage in co-design, selected applicants will be notified of the time and date of the 
co-design kickoff. The Government will make every effort to provide at least two weeks’ notice to 
facilitate participation in the co-design process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and meet 
eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on www.grants.gov, 
and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check the website to ensure they 
have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO 
has been received from the internet in its entirety. USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting 
from transmission or conversion process. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or 
accessing the NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique entity 
identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D. The registration 
process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to begin registration 
early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for questions is 
shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to all potential 
applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 


Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the 
Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or submission 
of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant. All 
preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

Nya Kwai Boayue 

Agreement Officer 

Regional Office of Acquisition and Assistance


 

Table of Contents 

2014 

 

P42TB1bA#y1 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 15 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 18 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 20 
SECTION E: CONCEPT PAPER MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 26 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 27 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 48 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 49 
ANNEX 1 – CONCEPT PAPER TEMPLATE 50 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 52 
ANNEX 3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 53 


 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as amended. The 
resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, 
and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the 
additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 


 

USAID/Lesotho wants to support an activity to deliver high-quality integrated prevention, care and 
treatment services that will sustain the reduction in HIV, TB, and COVID-19 transmission, morbidity, and 
mortality through the implementation of a comprehensive, people-centered program in Butha-Buthe and 
Mokhotlong districts. 

 

A successful application should focus on the provision of effective decentralized, differentiated, and 
integrated facility and community services, which maximize equitable access to comprehensive HIV, TB, 
and COVID-19 interventions using a primary health care approach that ensures clients access holistic 
services. In addition, the activity should provide health system strengthening technical support at sub-
national levels with limited support at national level to achieve and sustain epidemic control, including, but 
not limited to health system governance, human resources for health capacity building, collaborative 
quality improvement, monitoring, and evaluation (M&E), and site level supply chain management. Finally, 
the applicant should utilize adaptive management principles to inform sustained epidemic control through 
(i) collaboration, learning, and adapting (CLA); (ii) development of strategic partnerships with local 
entities, civil society organizations, and the private sector; and (iii) begin integration of the HIV, TB, and 
COVID-19 services into broader Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child and Adolescent Health 
(RMNCAH) services using a primary health care approach. By integrating multiple service delivery 
elements, a successful application should be able to leverage resources and common systems (i.e., 
governance, infrastructure, supply chain management, human resources, information systems, laboratory, 
infrastructure, service delivery, and community systems) to achieve the desired health outcomes efficiently 
and effectively. 

 

Primary clients are children, adolescents and adults living with HIV, pregnant and breastfeeding women, 
HIV exposed infants, key populations, TB patients, and communities affected by the HIV, TB, and 
COVID-19 pandemics. Secondary clients are the general population that need primary prevention 
services, health/community service providers, and policy makers at national and sub-national levels. 

 

II. BACKGROUND 


 

Lesotho has the second highest HIV prevalence in the world, at 22.7 percent in adults aged >15 years, with 
markedly higher rates among women (27.4 percent) than among men (17.8 percent), as per the 2020 
Lesotho Population-based HIV Impact Assessment (LePHIA). The country has an estimated 280,000 
people living with HIV and saw a decline in HIV incidence from 1.1 percent in adults aged 15-59 years 
from the 2016 LePHIA, to a 0.5 percent in the same population in 2020. Lesotho met the UNAIDS 
90/90/90 targets with 90 percent of people living with HIV (PLHIV) knowing their status, 97 percent of 
PLHIV who know their status are on ART, and 92 percent of those on ART having suppressed viral loads, 
an improvement from 4 years previously of 81 percent, 92 percent, and 88 percent respectively. The 
Prevention of Mother- to-Child-Transmission (PMTCT) program in Lesotho started in 2003 and continues 
to be one of the Ministry of Health’s (MOH) focal entry points into pediatric HIV prevention, care, and 
treatment services and maternal, neonatal, and child services. 

 


The Government of Lesotho (GOL) plays a pivotal role in providing political leadership in the delivery of 
HIV, TB, and other health care services. The GOL finances the majority of the national response along the 
continuum of care and treatment, covering 70 percent of antiretrovirals (ARVs), a significant share of 
essential medicines, and the majority of human resources and infrastructure costs 

 

III. PROBLEM STATEMENT 


 

Despite the achievement of the 90-90-90 UNAIDS goals, HIV/AIDS, TB, and emerging pandemics remain 
major public health priorities for the Government of Lesotho (GOL). Sustaining epidemic control requires 
intentional efforts to address the remaining gaps, which include: (i) suboptimal continuity of treatment 
coverage among diagnosed PLHIV on antiretroviral therapy (ART); (ii) diagnosis and treatment gap that is 
higher in children, adolescents, youth, key populations, and men (iii) aging cohort of adults on ART that 
poses new health needs e.g., non-communicable diseases; (iv) emerging pandemics that stretch the national 
health system; and (v) suboptimal coverage of combination prevention interventions. 

 

The HIV disease burden in young people aged 15-24 years is still high because they account for 50% of 
new infections (PEPFAR Recency program data). HIV prevalence is five times higher among young 
women aged 20-24 years than among male counterparts, and viral suppression among young people 
remained below the UNAIDS targets, regardless of sex (LePHIA, 2020). Lesotho continues to be among 
the top 20 countries with the highest global burden of HIV among pregnant women with a prevalence of 
22.8 percent. While there are approximately 41,000 annual deliveries in Lesotho, there remains an 
estimated 500 new HIV infections in children and 8,700 children living with HIV, (UNAIDS, 2021). 

 

Lesotho remains a high burden TB/HIV country with an estimated TB incidence (including HIV/TB co-
infection) in 2020 of 650 per 100,000 population (14,000 incident TB cases, out of which 8,200 are 
estimated to be TB and HIV co-infected), (Global TB Report, 2021). AIDS-related mortality has not 
significantly decreased from 4,908 deaths in 2016 to 4,700 in 2020 (UNAIDS, 2021). 

 

Despite significant gains on HIV treatment coverage and high viral suppression rates, Lesotho has the third 
lowest life expectancy globally at 54.79 in 2021. This could be affected by the high maternal, infant, and 
neonatal mortality rates and sub-optimal reproductive health, maternal, neonatal, child, and adolescent 
health (RMNCAH) service delivery at all levels of the primary health care system. Maternal, newborn 
and child health indices show suboptimal health outcomes with adolescent fertility rates at 97.2 per 1,000 
live births in 2019, maternal mortality ratio of 1.1 per 1,000-woman years of exposure, maternal mortality 
ratio of 1,204 per 100,000 live births, under 5 mortality rate is 89.2 per 1000 live births, stillbirth rate is 
27.9 per 1000 total births and neonatal mortality of 44 per 100 live births, the highest in the world. These 
stark figures underscore the vital importance of ensuring that close coordination and targeted programming 
with other RMNCAH partners is institutionalized to integrate HIV and TB services into a well performing 
quality health system. 

 

The COVID-19 pandemic has further stretched the health system to ensure the uptake and provision of 
essential services. To date in Lesotho, there have been 32,716 cumulative cases and 697 deaths. As of 
March 9, 2022, 40.3 percent of the population has been fully vaccinated. As a low-middle income country, 
Lesotho’s systems for laboratory diagnostics, case management, oxygen systems, human resources for 
health, health information, supply chain management, surveillance, and community health promotion have 
been stretched in an effort to address the triple HIV, TB, and COVID-19 pandemics and other current 
public health threats, while maintaining quality essential health services. 

 

 

 

 


IV. LEADR ACTIVITY RELATIONSHIP TO THE USG AND GOL POLICY FRAMEWORK 


 

The LEADR activity directly contributes to the PEPFAR strategy and the Government of Lesotho (GOL)’s 
goal of ensuring that 95 percent of people living with HIV know their status, 95 percent of those who 
know their status are on ART, and 95 percent of those on treatment are virally suppressed (95-95-95 
goals). In addition, it contributes to the USG and GOL policy framework for ending the COVID-19 
pandemic and emerging public health threats. 

 

PEPFAR has been partnering with the GOL since its inception to contribute to the reduction of HIV 
related morbidity and mortality. The overarching goal of the PEPFAR program in Lesotho is to expand 
access to quality HIV prevention, treatment, and related services in support of the National HIV/AIDS 
Strategy (2018-2023). The national HIV/AIDS strategic plan (NSP) goals are to (i) reduce new HIV 
infections by at least 50 percent by 2023 from 13,300 in 2017; (ii) reduce AIDS-related deaths by 50 
percent by 2023 from 4,900 in 2017; (iii) reduce mother to child transmission of HIV from 11.3 percent to 
less than 5 percent by 2023; and (iv) improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the national response 
planning, coordination, and service delivery. 

 

In addition, Lesotho is committed to end TB by 2030 through the National TB Strategic Plan (2019-2023) 
through reducing the overall mortality of TB by 75 percent and reducing the overall incidence of TB by 50 
percent. The GOL and the U.S. have a shared goal of reducing the number of new HIV, TB, and COVID-
19 infections. The current PEPFAR strategy focuses on the saturation of high-quality, HIV and TB 
prevention, care, and treatment services through a people-centered approach and supporting a strong policy 
framework. In addition, USAID contributes to the Lesotho National Preparedness and Response Plan for 
the COVID-19 pandemic in order to end the COVID-19 pandemic through acceleration of COVID-19 
vaccine access, case management, infection prevention and control, and strengthening resilience of health 
systems. 

 

The LEADR activity intends to build on these gains by progressively realizing transformation of key 
functionalities and program elements to local institutions e.g., non-governmental organizations, civil 
society organizations, private sector, district health management teams, etc., using innovative, sustainable 
organizational and capacity development approaches built on a strong health systems optimization 
platform. 

 

The LEADR activity contributes to the USAID/Southern African Regional Development Cooperation 
Strategy (RDCS) Development Objective 3: Resilience of People and Systems Advanced through 
Intermediate Result 3.2: Equitable Provision of Quality Health and Other Services Improved, and 
Intermediate Result 3.3: Citizen Participation and Leadership Increased. The LEADR activity directly 
responds to the USAID focus on resilience, localization, inclusivity, responsiveness with strong 
engagement and utilization of digital technologies and private sector approaches. Furthermore, the LEADR 
activity is fully in line with and PEPFAR sustainability goals to increase funding to local organizations and 
sustain epidemic control. 

 

 

V. GOAL AND RESULTS OF THE LEADR ACTIVITY 


 

The goal of the LEADR activity is to support the GOL to deliver high-quality integrated prevention, care 
and treatment services that will sustain the reduction in HIV, TB, and COVID-19 transmission, morbidity, 
and mortality in Lesotho through the implementation of a comprehensive, person-centered approach in 
Butha-Buthe and Mokhotlong districts. By the end of the award, a successful applicant should achieve the 
following results: 


• Result 1: Increased coverage of high-quality evidence-informed comprehensive and people-
centered HIV and TB prevention, diagnosis, care, and treatment services. 
• Result 2: Increased access and uptake of quality prevention, detection, vaccination, and clinical 
services to mitigate the impact and reduce transmission of emerging public health pandemics, 
including COVID-19. 
• Result 3: Strengthened district and community health systems using a primary health care 
approach to sustain epidemic control of HIV, TB, and other infectious diseases beyond activity 
implementation. 


 

VI. GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS 


 

The LEADR activity will be implemented in Butha Buthe and Mokhotlong districts of Lesotho. USAID 
desires to support an activity which provides technical assistance and direct service delivery support at 
facility and community levels to increase access to quality and comprehensive prevention, diagnostic, care, 
and treatment continuum of care. 

 

The successful applicant must collaborate with existing USAID PEPFAR implementing partners to 
effectively transition activities. Some of these partners include the Expanding Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS 
Clinical Services (ETHICS) and USAID/Providing Universal Services (PUSH) projects to ensure 
continuity of prevention and treatment services and handover of technical and programmatic support to the 
target districts in concert with Ministry of Health (MOH), USAID, and other key HIV/AIDS, TB, and 
COVID-19 partners and stakeholders. 

 

VII. TECHNICAL APPROACH 


 

Result 1: Increased coverage of high quality, comprehensive and person-centered HIV and TB 
prevention, diagnosis, care, and treatment services. 

 

USAID desires to support an activity that provides direct service delivery and targeted technical assistance 
to improve access, availability, demand for and utilization of quality HIV and TB services at facility and 
community levels integrated into essential service delivery platforms. The incumbent should build on the 
gains of the MOH efforts to sustain the reduction in morbidity, mortality, and HIV transmission in targeted 
populations and locations, and will employ an adaptive management approach, adjusting strategies and 
interventions based on data, changing environments that are responsive to local population needs. Key 
activity deliverables should include the following intermediate results (IRs): 

 

I.R 1.1: Reduce new infections among high-risk sub-populations through combination prevention services. 

 

Programming priorities include, but not be limited to: 

a. Increase access and provision of quality and client-centered Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for 
eligible target populations, including integration of PrEP in maternal newborn child health (MNCH) 
and family planning (FP) entry points, private sector, and other service outlets and provision of multi-
month dispensing (MMD) for PrEP clients. 
b. Expand access, utilization, and quality of post-gender-based violence (GBV) clinical care services 
including intimate partner violence (IPV) screening within all service outlets, saturating service 
coverage of the post-GBV care minimum service package and ensuring optimal linkages to 
community-based providers and services e.g., Lesotho Mountain Police Services, judiciary, and the 
PEPFAR Community GBV implementing partners. 
c. Provision of facility-based DREAMS HIV prevention service package to eligible HIV negative 
adolescent girls young and women, that includes, but is not limited to HIV testing services, HIV 
prevention education; screening and management of STIs, voluntary and informed choice in family 



planning and, PrEP, and onward referral to community DREAMS services and HIV treatment for 
those adolescents testing positive for HIV. 
d. Integrate the Undetectable = Untransmissible (U=U) service package for PLHIV in all service outlets 
including, but not limited to risk reduction counseling, condom promotion, ART adherence 
counseling, STI screening and management, and voluntary family planning services. 
e. Effective coordination with other national and sub-national stakeholders to ensure access to 
comprehensive prevention service delivery models are responsive to the needs of clients, address 
structural barriers, disabling sociocultural norms, and economic challenges that would increase the risk 
of HIV infection. 


 

I.R.1.2: Closing the HIV treatment gap in all ages and genders in the supported districts. 

 

Programmatic priorities include: 

a. Actively and effectively reaching undiagnosed PLHIV with targeted HIV testing services (HTS), 
optimal linkage to care, same day/rapid ART initiation and retention services especially in the first six 
month on treatment. 
b. Targeted case identification focusing on high yield HTS modalities, including safe and ethical index 
testing, use of the risk screening tools, diagnostic testing in TB, PMTCT, & inpatient settings, and 
scale-up of innovative testing approaches. 
c. Strengthen quality of testing services through internal and external quality control/quality assurance 
(QC/QA) and compliance with national counseling standards. 
d. Strengthen facility and community systems to improve differentiated service delivery for testing, 
initiation, and retention in care for PLHIV who have been on ART for <6 months, including enhanced 
clinical case management and universal adherence support. 
e. Ensure availability of systematic processes to track newly identified PLHIV who are not yet prepared 
to accept same day/rapid ART initiation to support them in their decision-making and address their 
treatment concerns. 
f. Integrate HIV self-testing in all testing modalities, targeting sub-populations with high unmet need 
e.g., children, men, youth, and Key Populations (KPs). 
g. Collaboration with PEPFAR Recency testing technical assistance implementing partners to integrate 
service delivery for newly diagnosed PLHIV and ensure coordination with USG prevention 
implementing partners to increase service acceleration in hot spot areas. 


 

I.R. 1.3: Saturate treatment coverage to ensure high population viral suppression and reduction of new 
infections in the supported districts. 

 

Programmatic priorities include, but not be limited to: 

a. Scale-up of innovative interventions that will increase quarterly treatment growth rates for all 
population segments in the supported districts. 
b. Ensure continuity of treatment for all population segments irrespective of duration on ART through 
innovative people-centered service delivery models and use of digital health technology. 
c. Saturate viral load coverage and sustain viral suppression rates through targeted demand creation in all 
DSD models. 
d. Expand decentralized drug distribution (DDD), including, but not limited to multi-month dispensing 
(MMD), community ART Groups (CAGs), mobile outreach clinics, and community ART distribution. 
The LEADR activity will work with GOL and supply chain stakeholders to ensure sufficient HIV 
drugs and commodities are available at the site levels to meet the DDD demands. 
e. Use of optimized ART regimen for both adults and children based on national and international policy 
guidelines. 
f. Strengthen community health systems to integrate HIV into existing community health services, 
reduce interruption in treatment and support re-engagement in to care, including, but not limited to, 



appointment reminders, active tracking systems, targeted clinical case management, non-judgmental, 
supportive providers, and virtual adherence support, innovations for re-engaging the highly migrant 
population in care. Sensitivities to the varied needs of the populations served (e.g., young adults, 
adolescents, KPs, men, families) should be a focus of mentoring of all providers to address beneficiary 
reticence in engagement in services. 
g. Improve treatment literacy levels, including U=U messaging, among clients, particularly in the youth 
and young adults and establish functional community support groups (e.g., peer support groups, 
caregiver clubs, youth clubs’ post-natal clubs, etc.). Work with community and faith leaders to 
broaden messaging platforms. 
h. Mainstream positive youth development in the overall program based on implementing the Youth 
Programming Assessment Tool (YPAT), or other similar tools, to ensure that service provision is 
responsive and caters to youth that addresses key prevention, testing, and treatment barriers and 
disseminates successes that youth accessing the full gamut of HIV services encounter. 


 

I.R. 1.4: Reduce morbidity and mortality among people living with HIV. 

 

Programming priorities include, but not be limited to: 

a. Strengthen management of treatment failure at all levels of care, which includes, but is not limited to, 
capacity building of service providers on enhanced adherence counseling; U=U treatment literacy, 
optimal viral load coverage, and active clinical case management of viremic patients and those 
confirmed to have treatment failure. 
b. Scale-up Advanced HIV Disease (AHD) services to all sites and attain optimal coverage of the core 
essential service package in eligible clients. 
c. Strengthen secondary prevention of cervical cancer to attain PEPFAR and national screening and 
treatment coverage rates among women living with HIV (WLHIV). 
d. Strengthen nutrition assessment counseling and support (NACS) in all service outlets at facility and 
community levels and ensure optimal linkage of malnourished patients to treatment based on national 
guidelines. This activity will also support essential nutrition service uptake within the first 1,000 days 
of life to improve pregnancy outcomes and child growth and development. 
e. Ensure integration of non-communicable disease (NCD) and acute care services within HIV, TB and 
COVID service outlets to ensure people-friendly, easy access to all health care needs, and non-
stigmatizing services. 
f. Integrate mental health, intimate partner violence (IPV) and Gender Based Violence (GBV) screening 
and treatment/referral services access at all sites offering HIV services. 
g. Improve bi-directional facility-community, intra-facility, and inter-facility referral systems for quality 
prevention, clinical care, treatment, and follow-up. This includes, but is not limited to the following: 
i. Strengthening collaboration with USG OVC partners to enroll children and adolescents living 
with HIV and their families to access broader social development programs among eligible 
households. 
ii. Active linkage of GBV survivors to access ongoing legal, social, and psychological support. 
iii. Access to the comprehensive package of DREAMS services for eligible adolescent girls and 
young women. 
iv. Increasing integration and access of essential health services for people living with HIV 





 

I.R. 1.5: Support the national End TB strategic goals and reduce the impact of TB disease among people 
living with HIV. 

 

Activity priorities include, but not be limited to: 


a. Develop innovative approaches for providing quality care and support services for HIV/TB co-
infection in alignment with WHO and national TB guidelines, ensuring treatment and retention of 
HIV and TB co-infected patients. 
b. Strengthen TB case identification by ensuring that all people receiving HIV services (including HIV 
testing in any setting) are screened for TB and that all people using TB services are tested for HIV. 
c. Saturate TB Preventive Therapy (TPT) coverage in all PLHIV and eligible contacts who screen 
negative for TB and attain national and PEPFAR TPT completion rates. 
d. Improve TB case management by ensuring that all who are diagnosed with TB receive appropriate TB 
care and treatment and attain national TB treatment success rates. This activity will actively link TB 
patients to existing social support, community involvement, and economic support services. 
e. Support coordination between TB and HIV programs to ensure linkages and retention along the 
continuum of care for individuals with both TB and HIV infection; and strengthen TB infection 
prevention and control measures at all supported sites. 
f. Support the National TB Program to strengthen TB contact tracing at facility and community levels 
with optimal linkage to TB diagnostic services and TPT. 
g. Improve integration of TPT or TB treatment in all differentiated service delivery models in an effort to 
ensure coordinated clinic visits for both TB and HIV. 




 

I.R:1.6: Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (MTCT) to less than 2% at 6 weeks and at 
final outcome (FO) through integrated PMTCT services in MNCH and keeping the mother-Baby pair 
alive. 

 

Programming priorities include, but not be limited to: 

a. Primary prevention of HIV among women of reproductive age including provision of family planning, 
dual protection, HIV testing services within MNCH to saturate knowledge of HIV status, dual HIV-
Syphilis testing in MNCH settings, optimal re-testing coverage of negative pregnant women, ethical 
index testing and partner notification services, social network testing, and optimal linkage to PrEP and 
treatment services. 
b. Prevention of unintended pregnancies among women living with HIV at facility and community 
levels. 
c. Improved health and treatment outcomes of pregnant and breastfeeding women and their infants, 
including optimal maternal treatment coverage, maternal viral load coverage, maternal viral 
suppression levels, HIV exposed infant ARV prophylaxis, and timely HIV-exposed infant viral testing 
as per the national algorithms. All pregnant and breastfeeding women should receive optimized ART 
regimens, differentiated service delivery models, MMD, family-centered care, use of point-of-care 
laboratory monitoring, and clinical case management for mother-baby pairs at risk of interruption in 
treatment or where mother is viremic or has treatment failure. 
d. Increase access to early infant diagnosis services in all settings (emergency, pediatric ward, PMTCT, 
and outpatient) to attain MOH and PEPFAR coverage rates within two months of birth and utilization 
of POC and digital technology to reduce turn-around-time of results to caregivers to below seven days, 
with optimal linkage to ART. 
e. Strengthen integrated care and support service packages for mother-infant pairs (MIP) to saturate 
knowledge of final infant PMTCT outcome at 18 months of age, exclusive breastfeeding and optimal 
infant feeding practices. The activity will strengthen family-centered care aligned to the MNCH 
schedule of services for mothers and infants. Mother-infant pairs will be prioritized for enrollment into 
the OVC program, including adolescent mothers living with HIV. MNCH services and 
HIV/TB/COVID services will be integrated and provided simultaneously to the MIP. 


 

 


Result 2: Increased access and uptake of quality prevention, detection, vaccination, and clinical services 
to mitigate the impact and reduce transmission of emerging public health pandemics, including 
COVID-19: 

 

The LEADR activity should provide technical support to the Ministry of Health and other relevant 
ministries in addressing emerging public health threats and/or epidemics, including infectious diseases that 
are threatening Lesotho's progress in achieving and sustaining HIV epidemic control and effective TB 
management. The activity should provide technical support to improve health system resilience and 
pandemic preparedness to address current and emerging public health threats, initially starting with the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The initial pandemic response focus should be on strengthening district, health 
facility, and community level planning, preparedness, and response systems to mitigate the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. USAID will provide guidance over the course of the award on additional public 
health responses the project should undertake based on the local context of emerging pandemics and 
availability of funding to support these activities. The COVID-19 pandemic priorities should be achieved 
through the following intermediate results (IRs): 

 

IR.2.1: Support the GOL’s national COVID-19 vaccine program. 

 

The LEADR activity should align to the National Deployment and Vaccination Plan (NDVP) to implement 
the following interventions: 

a. Technical support in the development and dissemination of COVID-19 vaccination guidelines, training 
materials, and job-aides. 
b. Capacity building of health care providers on the provision, storage, and monitoring of individuals 
receiving COVID-19 vaccines. 
c. Promote equitable access and delivery of safe COVID-19 vaccinations for targeted populations 
through expansion of service outlets e.g., mass vaccination, integration within ART/MNCH settings, 
mobile outreaches, and other community service outlets. 
d. Provide HRH surge support to meet the demand for vaccines, including, but not limited to, vaccine 
service delivery, demand creation, risk communication, and data collection & reporting. 


 

IR.2.2: Mitigate onward transmission of COVID-19 at facility and community levels. 

 

Priority interventions include: 

a. Capacity building of health care providers on COVID-19 infection prevention and control (IPC). 
b. Establish functional facility-based IPC Committees to ensure development of a site IPC plan and 
effective implementation of source control, administrative controls, and environmental and 
engineering controls to prevent TB and COVID-19 transmission. 
c. Ensure safety of providers and clients through procurement and optimal use of PPE, hand hygiene, and 
physical distancing in all facility and community-based service delivery points. 


 

I.R. 2.3: Strengthen health systems in the supported districts to rapidly respond, control and mitigate the 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and any other emerging diseases. 

 

Priority interventions include: 

a. Capacity building of health care providers at facility and community levels on COVID-19 clinical 
guidelines and risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) based on national strategy. 
b. Decentralize dual TB-COVID-19 screening and other infectious diseases, triage, and clinical 
assessments to all supported health centers, including hypoxia detection using pulse oximetry, with 
optimal linkage for ongoing management of confirmed cases based on disease severity. 
c. Expand screening, diagnosis, and treatment of co-morbidities that would increase the risk of severe 
COVID-19 disease in PLHIV, and TB patients e.g., hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cancer, etc. 



d. Promote access to timely, relevant, and life-saving information to support informed decision making to 
protect community members from COVID-19 transmission communicable and non-communicable 
diseases. 
e. Leverage existing PEPFAR program to prevent COVID-19 transmission, IPV/GBV risk reduction, and 
mitigate the impact of the pandemic on vulnerable populations. 
f. Support stakeholder engagement through a district level emergency operations center that will promote 
COVID-19 program data visibility, enhance coordination, resource leverage, and improve policy 
decision making building. 


 

Result 3: Strengthened district and community health systems to sustain epidemic control of HIV, TB, 
and other infectious diseases beyond activity implementation. 

 

Sustainable epidemic control requires strong national, district, and community level health systems. It 
requires effective collaboration and coordination of multiple stakeholders, and integration of services 
within GOL management structures, health systems, and policy environments to ensure sustained delivery 
of quality people-centered HIV and TB services during acute infectious disease pandemics. The LEADR 
activity will collaborate with the GOL, other PEPFAR implementing partners, the Global Fund, and 
multilateral stakeholders to ensure coordinated implementation of HIV and TB programs at the national 
and subnational level. This result area will be achieved through the following intermediate results (IRs): 

 

I.R.3.1: Strengthened coordination and oversight of integrated HIV and TB programming in supported 
districts. 

 

Priority interventions include: 

a. Technical support to the Ministry of Health in policy formulation, operationalization, and coordination 
with district health management teams (DHMT) on sub-national dissemination of HIV, TB, COVID-
19, and other health policies, guidelines, M&E tools, and training materials. 
b. Work with district management on transition of district-level and site-level monitoring and oversight 
of the HIV response to the DHMT by program year three on the following leadership elements: 
i. Collaborative quality improvement and quality assurance (CQI/QA) activities, including 
coaching, learning forums, and monitoring of CQI projects. 



ii. Data quality assessments, verification, and site level performance monitoring. 
iii. Oversight on site level supply chain stock management to meet demand for HIV prevention, care, 
and treatment services 
iv. Health care provider training, mentorship, and supportive supervision on the latest program 
updates and innovations, etc. 


 

c. By the end of program year two, all DHMTs in the supported districts will have a stewardship strategy 
for leading the epidemic response in their districts, taking into account the four leadership areas listed 
IR.3.1 (b) above. 


 

I.R. 3.2: Strengthened capacity of local (public and private) organizations to provide quality, people-
centered, and comprehensive HIV and TB services at facility and community levels. 

 

Priority interventions include, but are not limited to: 

a. Provide direct support and technical assistance to districts, private and public clinics, or local civil 
society organizations to improve quality of services, foster programmatic efficiencies at facility and 
community levels so as to sustain high coverage of prevention, care, and treatment services. 



b. Advocate within sub-national government entities and sites to ensure the service models are responsive 
to PLHIV and key population needs, socio-cultural norms and programing adaptability to any 
emerging public health threats. 
c. Provide organizational and technical capacity development of local sub-partner organizations (if any) 
with a timely strategy that ends with the local organizations’ ability to manage an award as a prime 
partner and effectively submit a proposal to other donor agencies in Lesotho. 
d. Design innovative approaches to bring in private-sector capital, expertise, and market-based 
approaches to ensure quality service delivery options and HSS efforts 


 

I.R. 3.3: Strengthen district-level HRH systems to sustain HIV epidemic control: Key interventions 
include. 

 

a. Integration of comprehensive HIV, TB, and COVID-19 services with the primary health care at 
facility and community levels. 
b. Targeted HRH surge support of critical cadres of staff to improve site- and community-level service 
delivery to bridge clinical cascade gaps required to sustain epidemic control. 
c. By the end of program year three, LEADR will develop and implement an innovative approach for 
phased site-level HRH transition in collaboration with national and district level policy makers. 


 

VIII. ADDITIONAL TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS 


 

1. Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA): 

 

USAID’s CLA approach aims to improve our development effectiveness in a more systematic and 
intentional way by encouraging strategic collaboration, continuous learning, and adaptive management 
throughout all our activities and programming. Successful applicants should incorporate these important 
principles throughout their design, development, and implementation. Integrating CLA into this program 
will help to ensure that interventions are coordinated with others, grounded in a strong evidence base, and 
iteratively adapted to remain relevant throughout implementation. 

 

In line with USAID’s CLA approach, the following are recommended during the implementation of the 
activity: 

a. Implementation science to define a core standard package that will promote the sustainability of HIV 
epidemic control. 
b. Utilization of a human-centered design approach to develop social, and behavior change 
communication (SBCC) messages for targeted audiences to influence and promote positive behavior 
changes (e.g., ensuring HIV testing, re-engagement in care, retention on treatment, and PrEP uptake of 
PrEP, etc.), promote tailored U=U treatment literacy, and maintain safe behaviors to reduce HIV 
incidence rates. This strategy will include community dissemination and involvement of local 
community leaders to improve reach and uptake of messaging. 
c. Utilize evidence-based programming shifts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and 
maintain core interventions that would sustain HIV epidemic control in the supported districts. 


 

 

2. Gender Analysis and Integration and Youth 

 

In accordance with USAID’s Gender Equality and Female Empowerment Policy, each activity must 
identify and address any gender gaps relevant to the implementation of the activity. The incumbent must 
complete a Gender Analysis within the first six months of the award and based on the outcomes of the 
analysis, develop an Action Plan that will feed into a service delivery model that integrates a gender lens in 


all supported districts to foster gender equity and reduce gender barriers and disparities over the life of the 
award, including monitoring, evaluation, reporting, collaboration, and learning. 

 

Furthermore, a successful Applicant should mainstream a positive youth development approach in the 
activity design, implementation, monitoring and learning over the life of the award, that will be informed 
by a Youth analysis that the recipient should conduct at the beginning of the LEADR activity. A success 
activity should implement, track, and report on the three main results-based achievements that USAID 
wants to support through the Gender Equity and Female Empowerment policy i.e. (i) increasing gender 
equity, (ii) reducing gender-based violence, and (iii) empowering women and girls. The Applicant should 
be familiar with USAID’s 2012 Youth in Development Policy and, where feasible, apply the Positive 
Youth Development approach and measurement toolkit in building youth participation and resilience 
throughout all relevant activities. The Monitoring, evaluation, and Learning Plan must include 
performance indicators to measure performance of the Positive Youth Development approach and the 
Gender Equity and Female Empowerment policy. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A – PROGRAM DESCRIPTION] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement with renewal periods pursuant to this notice of 
funding opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to 
provide an estimated $15,000,000.00 in total USAID funding over a five-year period, including 
$8,500,000 for the initial period of performance. The estimated amount total amount may be higher or 
lower depending on availability of funding and/or USAID needs. USAID reserves the right to issue one or 
more awards or not to make any award based on the outcomes of the merit review process. 

 

2. PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE AND RENEWAL PERIOD(S) 


 

The anticipated period of performance of this award is up to five (5) years, with an initial period of 
performance of three (3) years and two-one (1) year renewal periods awarded dependent upon Recipient 
performance, availability of funding, and USAID needs. 

 

RENEWALS: The anticipated award made under this NOFO may be eligible for annual renewals providing 
a possibility of a subsequent award to receive additional support for the project for succeeding periods, 
activities, or milestones if so, determined by USAID. The overall period of the Cooperative Agreement, 
including all renewals, shall not exceed the five (5) year period of performance of the award under this 
NOFO. USAID will inform the Recipient at least 90 days before the end of the period of performance of the 
initial award if the Recipient is eligible to apply for a renewal award. The Recipient must submit a renewal 
request 60 days prior to the end date. The renewal request should incorporate any changes in targets, 
geographical areas of implementation or implementation strategies required in the Country Operational Plan 
(COP) or outlined by USAID. 

 

The incumbent will submit a renewal request which includes a detailed annual work plan for the renewal 
period along with a detailed budget to be considered for the renewal opportunity. USAID. USAID will 
provide estimated amount of funding for the renewal period for planning purposes. Any renewals will be at 
the sole discretion of USAID. 

 

Funding of any renewal period or expansion of activities is contingent on the following: 

 

• Availability of funds; 

• Satisfactory progress towards meeting the award objectives; 

• Submittal of required reports; and 

• Compliance with the terms and conditions of the award, including the conditions for 

renewal. 

 

 

3. AWARD TYPE 


 

USAID anticipates the resulting award will be a Fixed Amount Award (FAA) and/or Cooperative 
Agreement. FAAs support a program with very specific elements and are appropriate for supporting 
specific programs when USAID is confident that a reasonable estimate of the actual cost of the overall 
effort can be established. The Applicant must be able to identify and quantify programmatic 
accomplishments or results in establishing award milestones. FAAs are based on the achievement of these 


milestones. It focuses on outputs and results. Guidance on FAAs can be found in ADS 303.3.25 at the 
following link: https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/agency-policy. 

 

The responsibility determination of the applicant to be awarded a FAA will be made in accordance with 
the requirements set forth under the “FAA Entity Eligibility Checklist” reflected under ADS 303.3.25, 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mak. 

 

4. Substantial Involvement 


 

USAID will be substantially involved in the implementation of the core program described in Section A, 
Activity Description. The intended purpose of the Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) involvement 
during the implementation of the Activity is to assist the Recipient in achieving the supported objectives. 
The Agreement Officer (AO) has delegated the following approvals to the AOR, except for changes to the 
Activity Description or the approved budget, which may only be approved by the AO. Substantial 
involvement includes the following: 

 

a. Approval of the Implementation Plan: The annual implementation plan will be developed using 
a co-creation approach in which USAID shall be substantially involved. 


 

As per ADS 303.3.18(c), the AOR is responsible for using Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting 
(CLA) approaches to maximize program results. Accordingly, the AOR has the authority to 
approve changes to the Implementation Plan. Such Programmatic Revisions may include: 

i. Adding or changing the number or type of interventions, or discontinuing particular 
interventions described in the implementation plan that are no longer effective or critical 
to achieving the programmatic objective. 
ii. Adding or changing the geographic focus of particular interventions within the Geographic 
Scope of the award. 
iii. Recommendations for redirection of the Activity interventions because of 
interrelationships with other development projects. 
iv. Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects or changing circumstances such as natural disaster or 
global pandemic. All such activities must be included in the approved program 
description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. 


 

b. Approval of Specified Key Personnel 


USAID may designate as key personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. 

 

c. Agency and Recipient collaboration or joint participation. 
i. Approval of Performance Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan: The AOR will 
review and approve the Recipient’s activity monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) 
plan and any changes thereto, inclusive of realistic and appropriate performance indicators 
and plans for periodic evaluation of activities. 





 

All substantial involvement must be within the program description budget, and other terms and 

conditions of the award. 

 

The Recipient shall immediately notify USAID of developments that have a significant impact on the 
award-supported activities. Also, notification shall be given in the case of problems, delays, or adverse 


conditions which materially impair the ability to meet the objectives of the award. This notification shall 

 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 935, (any 
area or country including the recipient country, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source). For 
more information on authorized geographic code, please see ADS 310: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1876/310.pdf. 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the LEADR Activity which is authorized 
by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the 
program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of 
sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in 
a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the 
Federal award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION B – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

General: This opportunity is restricted to local and regional entities as defined below. The Country 
Operational Plan of 2022, definition of a Local Partner: Under PEPFAR, a “local partner” may be an 
individual, a sole proprietorship, or an entity. However, to be considered a local partner, the applicant must 
submit supporting documentation demonstrating their organization meets at least one of the three criteria 
listed below at the time of application. In the below definition, a region is defined as one of the 2020 State 
Department/ ForeignAssistance.gov Sub Regional groupings (e.g., Southern Africa: Angola, Botswana, 
Bouvet Island, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mayotte, Mozambique, Namibia, Reunion, Saint Helena, South 
Africa, Zambia, and Zimbabwe). 

 

 

 


 


USAID/Southern Africa welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received 
financial assistance from USAID. Applicants who do not currently meet all USAID requirements for 
systems and controls may still be eligible under special award considerations and should not be 
discouraged from applying. The principal recipient is strongly encouraged to promote involvement of 


“underutilized” partners and local organizations in the implementation of this activity. Applications from 
individuals will not be accepted. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

There is no cost share requirement for awards issued under this NOFO. 

 

"Cost sharing or matching” is defined by USAID as “contributions, both cash and in-kind, which are 
necessary and reasonable to achieve program objectives, and which are verifiable from the recipient’s 
records.” Cost-sharing shall be subject to 2 CFR 200.306 and the standard provision entitled “Cost Sharing 
or Matching” for U.S. NGOs and non-U.S. NGOs. Although there is no general legislative requirement 
that recipients of cooperative agreements must cost share, USAID policy is that cost sharing is an 
important element of the USAID recipient relationship. 

 

3. Other 

 

3.1. NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS 




 

Each applicant organizations may submit only one concept paper/application. Potential sub-awardees may 
be proposed across multiple applications. As noted earlier, USAID discourages exclusive teaming 
arrangements. 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Nya Kwai Boayue 

Regional Agreement Officer 

USAID/Southern Africa 

nboayue@usaid.gov 

 

Hanifa Noor 

Senior Regional Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Southern Africa 

Email: hnoor@usaid.gov 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted via email to the above agency points of contract no 
later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a 
prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants 
as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of 
it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

3. AWARD PROCESS 


 

The award process for USAID/Southern Africa: LEADR Activity contains three phases: 

 

Phase 1 – Concept Paper 

Phase 2 – Co-Design 

Phase 3 – Full Application 

 

1) Interested Applicants must submit a concept paper based on the instructions below; 2) USAID/Lesotho 
will review the submitted concept papers and invite selected applicants to participate in co-design. The 
Government reserves the limit the number of co-design invitees based on the quality of the submitted 
applications or for reasons of efficiency. 3) At the conclusion of the co-design process USAID will invite 
selected applicant(s) to submit a full application. Not all participants in the co-design process will be asked 
to submit an application. Instructions for the requirements of the full application will be provided in a 
streamlined NOFO at that time. 

 

During the co-design stage, successful applicants will be invited to collaborate with USAID/Lesotho, other 
applicants, and workshop participants to identify and develop the activities that will help achieve the 
results desired under this NOFO. Applicants may also identify and incorporate additional partners; and 
determine respective roles and responsibilities related to the implementation of those activities. Please note 
that based on concept paper submissions or USAID needs; USAID reserves the right to eliminate the Co-
Design stage and invite applicant(s) to submit full applications. 

 

4. General Content and Form of Concept Paper 


 

a. Preparation of Concept Paper 


 


Concept Papers must follow the template in Annex 1. The Annex addresses general content requirements 
applying to the concept paper. 

 

b. For an application sent by multiple emails, please indicate in the subject line of the email whether the 
email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of multiple emails (if more 
than one is sent) and of attachments (e.g., ''No. 1 of 4", etc.) For example, if your cost application is 
sent in two emails, the first e-mail should have a subject line which says "[organization name], Title: 
“USAID/Southern Africa: LEADR Activity Concept Paper, Email Part 1 of 2." 


 

c. Applications must be submitted through Internet email (10 MB limit) per email. APPLICANTS 
MUST NOT SUBMIT ZIPPED FILES. No Annexes are requested with the concept paper and will not 
be reviewed. 


 

d. The Applicant must confirm that their electronic submissions were successfully received by the 
required due date. It is the Applicant's responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is 
complete and received on time. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may be 
considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should retain a copy of 
the Concept Paper and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Concept Paper Submission Procedures 

 

Concept Papers in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late Concept Papers will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of delivery 
receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

Email submission 

USAID’s preference is that the Concept Papers be submitted as consolidated email attachments, e.g., that 
you consolidate the various parts of a Concept Paper into a single document before sending it. If this is not 
possible, please provide instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for 
errors in compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting a Concept Paper electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email to 
confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, please 
send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name if submitted via 
grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless there has 
been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours occur 
from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in sufficient time 
ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government infrastructure is the 
USAID mail server. 

 

5. CONCEPT PAPER AND APPLICATION PROCESS 

 

Competition under this NOFO may consist of a three-step process where applicants first submit a concept 
paper for initial competitive review: 

 


1. All concept papers received during this phase will be evaluated by a USAID Merit Review Committee 
(MRC) for responsiveness to the merit review/evaluation criteria specified in this NOFO. 


 

2. If there is a co-creation phase, additional instructions and criteria for full application submissions will 
be provided after evaluation of concept papers, co-creation workshop (if necessary), and when full 
applications are requested. 


 

PHASE I: CONCEPT PAPER FORMAT, CONTENT AND SUBMISSION 

 

Applicants are asked to submit a concept note for USAID/SA’s consideration. A Concept Paper is a short, 
seven (7) page document where the applicant provides an overview of its idea. USAID has provided a 
template in Annex 1. 

 

Concept papers should be free of any intellectual property that the applicant wishes to protect, as the 
concept papers may be shared with other organizations as part of the co-creation process. However, once 
potential partners have been invited to engage in further discussions, they will work with USAID to 
identify proprietary information that requires protection. Therefore, organizations submitting concept 
papers provide USAID a royalty free, non-exclusive, and irrevocable right to use, disclose, reproduce, and 
prepare derivative works, and to have, or permit others to have, use of any information contained in the 
concept paper submitted under this NOFO. If USAID engages with the organization regarding its concept 
paper, the parties can negotiate further intellectual property protection for the organization’s intellectual 
property. Organizations must ensure that any submission under this NOFO is free of any third-party 
proprietary data rights that would impact the license granted to USAID herein. 

 

Compelling concepts that clearly demonstrate how they will address one or more results areas from the 
Program Description may be included in USAID/SA’s co-creation process. Please see a description of that 
process below. 

 

Applicants must not submit a full application unless requested to do so by USAID/SA after the 
Agency completes its review of the concept note and deems the concept stage complete. Full 
applications submitted without direction from USAID/SA will not be reviewed nor considered for 
Award under this NOFO. 

 

USAID will respond to concept papers received with a confirmation receipt. Concept papers are reviewed 
based upon the criteria outlined in Section E below. As soon as possible after submission, the applicant 
will be informed by an Agreement Officer (AO) as to whether they have been chosen to engage in a co-
creation process with the Mission and then submit a full application. If selected, they will be given a due 
date for the submission of the full technical and cost application. This will include time for co-creation and 
collaboration with the Mission. 

 

The concept paper evaluation will result in one of three outcomes: 

 

i. A decision to forego further consideration of the approach proposed in the concept paper, Or 
ii. A decision to invite the applicant to participate in a co-design workshop, Or 
iii. A decision to request the applicant to submit a full application. 


 

i. CONSORTIUMS: 


 

Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to partner with local, regional, or international organizations 
to enable successful implementation of the program. Given the limited funding of this award and the broad 
scope, applicants should propose innovative ways to reduce managerial costs of any sub-partners and sub-


grantees such as sharing office space, vehicles, etc. Applicants should seek to reduce overhead by 
considering shared office spaces with a focus on targeted technical support. Sub-awards to organizations 
which do not meet the definition of local or regional organizations must not exceed 40 percent of the 
proposed budget. During the co-design and full application stage applicants may modify the structure of 
any initially proposed (subtract or add sub-partners). 

 

PHASE I: BUDGET FORMAT 

 

Estimated summary budget (up to 1 page): The Applicant should provide a best estimate of prime award 
costs and costs for proposed subawards. To facilitate the Applicant’s preparation of the budget application, 
a template is provided below. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents: 

 

i. The estimated budget for the initial three-year period of the award is $8,500,000. 
ii. Summary Budget for the initial period must be broken out by year for activities implemented by the 
Applicant and any potential sub-applicants as shown below. No additional detail is required at the 
concept paper stage. 






 

 

Estimated Budget Summary 

Cost Elements 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

TOTAL 

Prime Award Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

Sub-awards 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL AWARD BUDGET 

 

 

 

 

Cost Share (If proposed) 

 

 

 

 

Leverage (If proposed) 

 

 

 

 



 

 

PHASE II: CO-CREATION WORKSHOP PROCESS 

 

The estimated timeframe for the co-creation workshop is September – November 2022, after which 
selected applicants will be asked to submit a full application. Applicants should expect to be given 
between 20-30 days to submit a full application. 

 

Selected applicant(s) will be invited by the Agreement Officer to participate in a facilitated three-day co-
creation workshop with USAID using either virtual, in-person, or hybrid approaches and/or possibly other 
successful concept paper applicants. The Agreement Officer reserves the right to limit the number of 
applicants invited to join the co-creation workshop for efficiency should the number of potential applicants 
exceed that which allows for a productive co-design process. 

 

ADS 201.6 defines co-creation as “a design approach that brings people together to collectively produce a 
mutually valued outcome, using a participatory process that assumes some degree of shared power and 
decision-making.” The “Discussion Note: Co-Creation Additional Help” does not distinguish between “co-


creation” and “co-design,” choosing instead to use “co-creation” as an umbrella term describing 
collaborative design and development of USAID activities. 

 

a) Co-design Process 


 

Note: None of USAID’s communication during the co-creation process should be interpreted as a 
commitment to making an award of USAID funding. 

 

During the first two days, the co-creation efforts are envisioned as follows: 

 

1) To explore and validate the health challenges and jointly develop an inclusive theory of change 
that has promising locally led solutions or expand existing evidence-based solutions. 
2) To facilitate learning, sharing, and networking across USAID, a range of partners and relevant 
technical experts. 


 

USAID envisages an open, creative back-and-forth process with external experts, implementers, and 
applicants to: 

 

● Build a strong analysis rooted in multiple, diverse perspectives and forms of expertise beyond 
USAID and the applicants. 
● Promote multiple viewpoints that shall help to identify parameters, prioritize focus areas, or 
identify opportunities for system collaboration. 
● Solicit the feedback, validation, and buy-in of multiple stakeholders. 
● Better understand local needs and constraints and encourage local communities to act. 
● Approach development through a more inclusive, collaborative, creative, and open process. 


 

A robust theory of change (TOC) is based on an in-depth causal analysis of issues influencing the situation 
of interest and is rooted in a rigorous and evolving evidence base. Developing and using a TOC builds a 
common understanding of activity logic and assumptions among stakeholders, and facilitates future 
monitoring, adaptive management, learning and evaluation. Diverse guidance exists on how to best design 
and use a TOC. USAID has published a TOC training and more specifically, including Using Results 
Chains to Depict Theories of Change. Use of results chains is the preferred approach for building out the 
TOC and incorporating tightly aligned activities and monitoring components. 

 

On the third day, the focus of the co-design workshop will be one-on-one sessions with potential 
applicants with the goal of finalizing the Program Description, discuss the Work Plan, Key Personnel, the 
subpartners and the budget threshold that will be utilized to inform the full technical and cost application 
in Phase III. 

 

USAID envisages as an outcome of the co-design process a shared understanding of the theory of change 
and further definition of the proposed concepts and required resources. 

 

If an applicant does not succeed at the co-creation phase, the process ends for that applicant. USAID 
reserves the right to remove any co-creation participant from award consideration should the parties fail to 
reach agreement on activity concept, design, award terms, conditions, or cost/price within a reasonable 
time, the participant fails to provide requested additional information in a timely manner, or the U.S. 
Government believes it is in its best interest. 

 

Applicants will not be required to submit technical or cost application material for this phase. Co-creation 
workshop participants will be expected to set aside competitive interests and work together with other 
applicants/participants to share and discuss potential solutions collaboratively. Workshop 


applicants/participants will rely on each other for input and insight in order to make sure that the potential 
solutions are relevant, based on the most up-to-date information, and viable with regard to implementation 
and documentation. There is no guarantee that participation in the co-creation workshop will lead to 
an award from USAID. This is a collaborative process, and the outcome may be that all, some, or 
none of the participants will be engaged in the final award. 

 

Note: Any costs associated with attending a co-creation workshop will not be reimbursed by USAID. 

 

Applicants are advised that participation in the co-creation process under this NOFO is entirely at their 
own risk; the Government is not responsible for any costs incurred by the applicant if the applicant decides 
to accept the invitation to co-create with USAID. A commitment to an award of USAID funding is only 
made when a Fixed Amount Award is signed by the Agreement Officer. 

 

6. PHASE III: FULL TECHNICAL APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS 

 

Applicants must not submit a complete application without specific written approval from the Agreement 
officer. 

 

Applicants will be asked to submit a detailed technical application that will become the program 
description; a detailed cost application; branding and marking plan; certifications; and other information as 
indicated by USAID. The full application also requires the applicant to complete specific USG forms and 
to provide additional information that the USAID/Southern Africa will need to move forward with an 
appropriate implementing instrument. All full applications will be reviewed for their technical merit 
against the full application merit review criteria defined in the NOFO. 

 

If the Merit Review Committee selects application(s) for funding, its review will be shared with the 
Agreement Officer for cost analysis, final approval and award negotiation. During this stage, the 
Apparently Successful Applicant(s) and USAID may further and clarify general resource requirements. 
The Apparently Successful Applicant(s) may also be asked to provide additional information about its 
technical approach, capacity, management and organization, proposed cost and budget, responsibility, and 
representations and certifications. 

 

Technical Application Format 

 

USAID may ask selected applicants to submit a full application. Detailed submission instructions will be 
submitted at that time. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION D - APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION] 


SECTION E: CONCEPT PAPER MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 

 

1. Criteria 


 

The application will be evaluated in accordance with the evaluation criteria defined in this section. To 
facilitate the review of the application, the Applicant should follow the guidance in Annex 1. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

a) Merit Review 


 

Phase I: Concept Paper 

 

Concept Papers received under this NOFO will be evaluated by a USAID Selection Committee (SC) in 
accordance with the selection criteria detailed below. The purpose of this review is to ensure that 
prospective partners bring appropriate capabilities, experiences, and potential contributions to the co-
creation process (if held) and ultimately the implementation of activities. A concept paper is determined to 
be successful if it receives a PASS overall based on the four criteria in the NOFO, which are all equally 
important. The final selection of successful concept papers will be determined by the AO. If the number of 
participants need to be reduced for efficiency or USAID decides to proceed directly to a request for full 
application, the AO will direct the selection committee to rank the successful concepts by order of merit 
using the same criteria. 

 

Applicants should note that these criteria: (1) serve as the standard against which all applications will be 
evaluated, and (2) serve to identify the significant matters that applicants should address in their 
applications. 

 

Criteria 1 – The overall quality of the technical approach and innovativeness of the proposed solutions to 
provide pathways to achieve the result areas and contribute to the goal and objectives of the LEADR 
activity. 

 

Criteria 2 – The Applicant’s proposed program has clear goals and objectives that are responsive to the 
context and that describe how the program will address the problem(s) outlined in the problem statement. 

 

Criteria 3 – The proposed program promotes localization and long-term sustainability. Ensuring 
meaningful inclusion and participation of local actors throughout the project cycle. 

 

Criteria 4 – The proposed applicant and partnerships (if proposed) demonstrate effective professional and 
institutional capacity. 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION E - APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION] 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY.


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been appropriated, 
allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID anticipates that these 
procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby notified of these requirements 
and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following policies and 
regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 

For Non-US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 3, for a link to the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting from this 
NOFO. 

 

Branding and Marking Plan 

 

Applicants are requested to note in their full application that in accordance with 2 CFR 700.16, USAID 
requires the submission of a Branding Strategy and a Marking Plan prior to award. The Marking Plan may 
include a request for approval of one or more exceptions to the marking requirements in 2 CFR 700.16. 
The AO will request the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan from the successful applicant at the time 
determined appropriate to do so. The AO evaluates the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan (including any 
requests for exceptions) for approval consistent with the regulations contained in 2 CFR 700.16, ADS 303 
and ADS 320. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

The recipient shall comply with all USAID and PEPFAR/Lesotho reporting requirements, including but 
not limited to timely High Frequency Reports; Quarterly Financial Reports; Quarterly Progress Reports; 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan; Annual Work Plans; Quarterly Costing Analysis; PEPFAR 
Annual Expenditure Reports; Semi-Annual/Annual Progress Reports; Final Agreement Completion 
Report. The recipient will be responsible for ensuring that all of the country-specific USG reporting 
requirements and deadlines are met. 

 

PEPFAR MER INDICATOR LIST 

 

Indicator Code 

Indicator 
Group 

Indicator Description 

Reporting 
Frequency 

AGYW_PREV 

Prevention 

Percentage of adolescent girls and young women 
(AGYW) that completed at least the DREAMS 
primary package of evidence-based 

Semi-Annual 




Indicator Description 

Indicator Code 

Indicator 
Group 

Reporting 
Frequency 

Prevention 

Number of key populations reached with individual 
and/or small group-level HIV prevention interventions 
designed for the target population 

Semi-Annual 

services/interventions. 

CXCA_SCRN 

Testing 

Number of HIV-positive women on ART screened for 
cervical cancer 

Semi-Annual 

CXCA_TX 

Treatment 

Percentage of cervical cancer screen-positive women 
who are HIV-positive and on ART eligible for 
cryotherapy, thermocoagulation or LEEP who 
received cryotherapy, thermocoagulation or LEEP 

Semi-Annual 

EMR_SITE 

Health 
Systems 

Number of PEPFAR-supported facilities that have an 
electronic medical record (EMR) system within the 
following service delivery areas: HIV Testing 
Services, Care & Treatment, Antenatal or Maternity 
Services, Early Infant Diagnosis or Under Five Clinic, 
or TB/HIV Services 

Annual 

FPINT_SITE 

Prevention 

Number of HIV service delivery points (SDP) at a site 
supported by PEPFAR that are providing integrated 
voluntary family planning (FP) services 

Annual 

GEND_GBV 

Prevention 

Number of people receiving post-gender-based 
violence (GBV) clinical care based on the minimum 
package 

Semi-Annual 

HRH_PRE 

Health 
Systems 

Number of new health workers who graduated 

Annual 

from a pre-service training institution or program as a 
result of PEPFAR-supported strengthening efforts, 
within the reporting period, by select cadre 

HTS_INDEX 

Testing 

Number of individuals who were identified and tested 
using Index testing services and received their results 

Quarterly 

HTS_RECENT 

Testing 

Number of newly diagnosed HIV-positive persons 
who received testing for recent infection with a 
documented result during the reporting period 

Quarterly 

HTS_SELF 

Testing 

Number of individual HIV self-test kits distributed 

Quarterly 

HTS_TST 

Testing 

Number of individuals who received HIV Testing 
Services (HTS) and received their test results 

Quarterly 

KP_MAT 
KP_PREV 

Prevention 

Number of people who inject drugs (PWID) on 
medication-assisted therapy (MAT) for at least 6 
months 

Annual 

PMTCT_ART 

Treatment 

Percentage of HIV-positive pregnant women who 
received ART to reduce the risk of mother-to-child-

Quarterly 




Testing 

Percentage of new and relapse TB cases with 
documented HIV status 

Quarterly 

Indicator Code 

Indicator 
Group 

Indicator Description 

Reporting 
Frequency 

transmission (MTCT) during pregnancy 

PMTCT_EID 

Testing 

Percentage of infants born to HIV-positive women 
who received a first virologic HIV test (sample 
collected) by 12 months of age 

Quarterly 

PMTCT_FO 

Testing 

Percentage of final outcomes among HIV exposed 
infants registered in a birth cohort 

Annual 

PMTCT_HEI_POS 

Testing 

Number of HIV-infected infants identified in the 
reporting period, whose diagnostic sample was 
collected by 12 months of age. 

Quarterly 

PMTCT_STAT 

Testing 

Percentage of pregnant women with known HIV status 
at antenatal care (includes those who already knew 
their HIV status prior to ANC) 

Quarterly 

PP_PREV 

Prevention 

Number of priority populations (PP) reached with the 
standardized, evidence-based intervention(s) required 
that are designed to promote the adoption of HIV 
prevention behaviors and service uptake 

Semi-Annual 

PrEP_CT 

Prevention 

Number of individuals, excluding those newly 
enrolled, that return for a follow-up visit or reinitiation 
visit to receive pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to 
prevent HIV during the reporting period 

Quarterly 

PrEP_NEW 

Prevention 

Number of individuals who were newly enrolled on 
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to prevent HIV 
infection in the reporting period 

Quarterly 

SC_ARVDISP 

Health 
Systems 

The number of adult and pediatric ARV bottles (units) 
dispensed by ARV drug category at the end of the 
reporting period 

Semi-Annual 

SC_CURR 

Health 
Systems 

The current number of ARV drug units (bottles) at the 
end of the reporting period by ARV drug category 

Semi-Annual 

TB_ART 

Treatment 

Proportion of HIV-positive new and relapsed TB cases 
on ART during TB treatment 

Annual 

TB_PREV 
TB_STAT 

Prevention 

Proportion of ART patients who started on a standard 
course of TB Preventive Treatment (TPT) in the 
previous reporting period who completed therapy 

Semi-Annual 

TX_CURR 

Treatment 

Number of adults and children currently receiving 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) 

Quarterly 

TX_ML 

Treatment 

Number of ART patients (who were on ART at the 
beginning of the quarterly reporting period or initiated 

Quarterly 




Indicator Code 

Indicator 
Group 

Indicator Description 

Reporting 
Frequency 

treatment during the reporting period) and then had no 
clinical contact since their last expected contact 

TX_NEW 

Treatment 

Number of adults and children newly enrolled on 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) 

Quarterly 

TX_PVLS 

Viral load 
Coverage 
and 
Suppression 

Percentage of ART patients with a suppressed viral 
load (VL) result (<1000 copies/ml) documented in the 
medical or laboratory records/laboratory information 
systems (LIS) within the past 12 months 

Quarterly 

TX_RTT 

Treatment 

Number of ART patients who experienced IIT during 
any previous reporting period, who successfully 
restarted ARVs within the reporting period and 
remained on treatment until the end of the reporting 
period. 

Quarterly 

TX_TB 

Treatment 

Proportion of ART patients screened for TB in the 
semiannual reporting period who start TB treatment. 

Semi-Annual 

VMMC_CIRC 

Prevention 

Number of males circumcised as part of the voluntary 
medical male circumcision (VMMC) for HIV 
prevention program within the reporting period 

Quarterly 

LAB_PTCQI 

Health 
Systems 

Number of PEPFAR-supported laboratory-based 
testing and/or Point-of-Care Testing (POCT) sites 
engaged in continuous quality Improvement (CQI) and 
proficiency testing (PT) activities. 

Annual 

OVC_HIVSTAT 

Testing 

Percentage of orphans and vulnerable children (<18 
years old) enrolled in the OVC Comprehensive 
program with HIV status reported to implementing 
partners. 

Semi-Annual 

OVC_SERV 

Prevention 

Number of beneficiaries served by PEPFAR OVC 
programs for children and families affected by HIV 

Semi-Annual 

Indicator Code 

Indicator 
Group 

Indicator Description 

Reporting 
Frequency 

AGYW_PREV 

Prevention 

Percentage of adolescent girls and young women 
(AGYW) that completed at least the DREAMS 
primary package of evidence-based 
services/interventions. 

Semi-Annual 

CXCA_SCRN 

Testing 

Number of HIV-positive women on ART screened for 
cervical cancer 

Semi-Annual 

CXCA_TX 

Treatment 

Percentage of cervical cancer screen-positive women 
who are HIV-positive and on ART eligible for 
cryotherapy, thermocoagulation or LEEP who 
received cryotherapy, thermocoagulation or LEEP 

Semi-Annual 




Indicator Code 

Indicator 
Group 

Indicator Description 

Reporting 
Frequency 

EMR_SITE 

Health 
Systems 

Number of PEPFAR-supported facilities that have an 
electronic medical record (EMR) system within the 
following service delivery areas: HIV Testing 
Services, Care & Treatment, Antenatal or Maternity 
Services, Early Infant Diagnosis or Under Five Clinic, 
or TB/HIV Services 

Annual 

FPINT_SITE 

Prevention 

Number of HIV service delivery points (SDP) at a site 
supported by PEPFAR that are providing integrated 
voluntary family planning (FP) services 

Annual 

GEND_GBV 

Prevention 

Number of people receiving post-gender-based 
violence (GBV) clinical care based on the minimum 
package 

Semi-Annual 

HRH_PRE 

Health 
Systems 

Number of new health workers who graduated 

Annual 



 

COVID-19 INDICATOR LIST 

Area Name 

Indicator 

Indicator 
Type 

Frequency 

Disaggregation 

Objective 1: Accelerate widespread and equitable access to and delivery of safe and effective COVID-19 
vaccinations 

Pharmacovigilance 
and Safety 
Monitoring 

Percentage of adverse event 
following immunization 
(AEFI) reports reviewed by 
the appropriate responsible 
bodies with USAID support 
among those submitted to 
country monitoring systems 

Technical 
performance 
(outcome) 

Quarterly 
required 

Type of USG support 
(direct/indirect), severity 
(Minor, moderate, serious) 

Community 
Engagement and 
Demand 

 Number of people reached 
through USG-supported mass 
media and social media with 
COVID-19 vaccine-related 
messaging (by media type) 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

Monthly 

TV, Radio, Print, 
Websites, Telephone/SMS, 

 Social Media 

Number of vaccine campaigns 
supported by USG (and 
number of doses given during 
these campaigns) 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 

Percentage of population who 
have received a vaccine, or 
who would receive a vaccine 
once it became available 
(demand cap) 

Technical 
performance 
(outcome) 

Monthly 

Age, Sex, Geography 




Frequency 

Disaggregation 

Area Name 

Indicator 

Indicator 
Type 

Policy, Planning, 
and Coordination 

USAID has supported the 
country in the development or 
adaptation of key vaccine 
readiness and implementation 
tools or activities (yes/no) 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

Quarterly 
required 

Active multi sectoral 
coordination mechanisms 

Tools for 

 conducting safety 
monitoring 

Subnational 

 COVID-19 vaccine micro 
plans 

Plans for 

 vaccine distribution 

Vaccine 

 tracking systems 

Regulatory/policy 

 environment for COVID-
19 vaccines 

Studies to 

 inform COVID-19 
vaccine demand and 
acceptance 

A system for 

 rumor tracking and 
response 

Cold Chain and 
Supply Logistics 

Number of vaccine doses 
delivered to designated in-
country destinations with 
USG support 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 Vaccine Brand 

Total number of doses 
available 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Donated, purchased 
disaggregation 

Total number of regimens 
available, risk adjusted, per 
100 population - (corresponds 
to the percentage of 
population that could be fully 
vaccinated given supply) 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 Vaccine Brand 

Share of supply provided by 
USG donations 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 Vaccine Brand 




Area Name 

Indicator 

Indicator 
Type 

Frequency 

Disaggregation 

Percentage of supply which 
has been used 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 Vaccine Brand 

Rate of administration of 
vaccines 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 Vaccine Brand 

Human Resources 
for Health 

Number of staff and 
volunteers trained on COVID-
19 vaccine-related topics with 
USG support 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Cadre, Sex 

Number of health workers, 
community leaders, teachers, 
vaccine educators and 
administrators trained on 
vaccine related topics 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Sex 

Number of health workers 
who are remunerated by USG 
to support workload required 
for COVID-19 vaccine 
delivery in the reporting 
period 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Cadre (Clinical, 
Community/lay, data 
management, supervision 
and or logistic 

Service Delivery 

Number of vaccination sites 
supported by USG during the 
reporting period and total 
number of doses administered 
at these sites 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Site type (Fixed sites, 
community-based outreach 
vaccination sites, Mobile 
team (or clinic) or transit 
team strategy, Mass 
vaccination 
sites/campaigns) 

Number and percentage of 
people who received a first 
dose of an approved COVID-
19 vaccine (COV-1) with 
USG direct support 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Vaccine Brand, Sex, 
Geography, Health care 
workers (HCWs), and 
other high-risk populations 
(i.e., Elderly, adult, 
adolescent, pediatric) 

Number and percentage of 
people who received a last 
recommended dose of primary 
series of an approved COVID-
19 vaccine (COV-c) with 
USG direct support 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

Vaccine Brand, Sex, 
Geography, Health care 
workers (HCWs), and 
other high-risk populations 
(i.e., Elderly, adult, 
adolescent, pediatric) 




Area Name 

Indicator 

Indicator 
Type 

Frequency 

Disaggregation 

Number and percentage of 
people who received all 
recommended booster dose(s) 
of an approved COVID-19 
vaccine (COV-2,3,4) with 
USG direct support 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

 Monthly 

 

Objective 2: Reduce morbidity and mortality from COVID-19, mitigate transmission, and strengthen 
health systems, including to prevent, detect, and respond to pandemic threats 

Result Area 1: Risk Communication and Community Engagement 

 

Percentage of population with 
knowledge, attitudes, 
practices of protective 
COVID-19 behaviors 

Technical 
performance 
(outcomes) 

Quarterly 
required 

 

Number of people reached 
through mass and social 
media (by media type) 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

Monthly 

TV, Radio, Print, 
Websites, Telephone/SMS, 

 Social Media 

Number of persons trained in 
RCCE 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

Monthly 

 

Result Area 2: Surveillance, Case Finding, Case Investigation 

 

Number of health workers 
trained on surveillance 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

Quarterly 
required 

Sex 

Number of people trained on 
surveillance and/or rapid 
response (case investigation, 
contact tracing, and case 
finding) for COVID-19 

Adaptive 
management 
(output) 

Quarterly 

Sex and Subnational unit 

Result Area 3: Laboratory Systems 

 

Number of COVID-19 
specimens transported (by 

 turnaround time) 

Technical 
performance 
(outcome) 

Monthly 

Subnational unit and 
Specimen transport time 
(i.e. <24 hrs., 

 24-72hrs, >72 hours, 
Unknown) 

Number of health workers 

 trained in COVID-19 testing 
or specimen transport 

Adaptive 
management 
(Output) 

Monthly 

Sex and Subnational unit 

Number of diagnostics 

 tests and auxiliary 

Output 

Monthly 

Diagnostic Test Kits and 
Reagents 




NOFO 72067422RFA00006Local Entities Advancing and Driving Health Responses(LEADR) Activity

Area NameIndicatorIndicatorTypeFrequencyDisaggregationdiagnostics supplies procured 
and deliveredAuxiliaryDiagnostic CommoditiesResult Area 4: Infection Prevention and Control (IPC)
Percent and number ofUSAID-supported healthfacilities meeting national IPCguidelinesTechnicalperformance 
(outcome)
QuarterlyrequiredBysubnational unitNumber of healthfacilitieswith staff trained in IPC forCOVID-19Adaptivemanagement(output)
MonthlyBy subnational unitNumber of health and non-
health workers who weretrained in IPC topicsAdaptivemanagement(output)
MonthlySex, subnationalunit andcadreNumber of people reachedwith critical WASH suppliesand servicesAdaptivemanagement(output)
MonthlySex and Subnational unitResult Area 5: Case Management
Improvements in quality ofkey critical care measures inUSAID assisted healthfacilitiesTechnicalperformance 
(outcome)
QuarterlyRequiredNumber of facilities receivingTA for case management suchas facility-level assessments,
guidance and/or training forreporting periodAdaptivemanagement(output)
MonthlyNumber of health workerstrained in COVID-19 case 
management in reporting 
periodAdaptivemanagement(output)
MonthlyType of training, Sex, and 
cadreNumber ofUSAID-donated oxygen-
related commodities delivered(3 categories)
InputsQuarterlyPressure Swing Absorption 
(PSA)/ Vacuum SwingAdsorption (VSA)plants,
LOX tanks,
Oxygen concentrators,
Pulse oximeters,
accessories, etc.


NOFO 72067422RFA00006Local Entities Advancing and Driving Health Responses(LEADR) Activity

Area NameIndicatorIndicatorTypeFrequencyDisaggregationNumber of confirmed/suspectcases admitted in hospital 
Adaptivemanagement(Output)
MonthlyAge, Sex, and co-
morbidityProportionof hypoxemicpatients’ clients provided withsupplemental oxygenAdaptivemanagement(Output)
MonthlyAge, Sex, andco-
morbidityNumber of COVID-19 
patients treatment outcomesAdaptivemanagement(Output)
MonthlyAge, Sex, and co-
morbidityNumber who received 
COVID-19 symptom screen in 
the OPD, MNCH, TB, ART,
and specialized clinicsAdaptivemanagement(Output)
MonthlyAge and SexNumber of hypertensive ordiabetic PLHIV and TBtreatedAdaptivemanagement(Output)
MonthlyAge and SexNumber of PLHIV andPMTCT clients reached withmental health screening andcounseling servicesAdaptivemanagement(Output)
MonthlyAge and SexResult Area 6: Coordinationand Operations
Number of technicalstrategies, plans, protocolsdeveloped or upgraded to 
operationalize the national 
COVID-19 strategyAdaptivemanagement(output)
QuarterlyrequiredStrategiesPlansProtocols/ GuidelinesJob aides

4.Financial Reporting
a)Quarterly Financial Reports:
The recipient willprepare and submit to the AOR a quarterly financialreport within 30 daysaftertheend 
of the recipient’s firstfiscal yearquarter, and quarterlythereafter.

Quarterly financialreportsshould contain, at aminimum:

●Total funds awarded to date by USAID into the assistance. 
●Total funds previously reported asexpended by recipient main lineitems. 
●Total funds expended in the current quarter by the recipient by the mainlineitems.
●Totalunliquidated obligationsby main line items; and, 
●Unobligated balance of USAID funds. 

 

b) Annual Program Expenditure Reporting: 


 

In 2018, the USG introduced a new annual reporting requirement of expenditures of PEPFAR 
programs at the end of each fiscal year. The expenditure report (ER) will be an ongoing PEPFAR 
activity and is being institutionalized as part of routine PEPFAR reporting. All PEPFAR implementing 
partners are required to adhere to this reporting requirement. The goal of this interagency exercise is to 
better understand the costs USG incurs to provide a broad range of HIV services and support and 
subsequently use this information to improve program planning. Recipients of PEPFAR funding are 
required to capture PEPFAR Program Expenditures in an Excel form, which will be uploaded and 
submitted using the Data for Accountability, Transparency and Impact (DATIM). 

 

5. Program Planning and Reporting 


 

a) Gender and Youth Analysis: 


 

In addressing gender issues, the incumbent should conduct an activity-specific gender analysis within 
six months of program implementation and develop a clear action plan to address any issues identified. 

 

b) Annual Work Plan: 


 

The recipient should submit an annual work plan to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The 
annual work plan will describe activities to be conducted at a greater level of detail than the Program 
Description but shall be cross-referenced with the applicable sections in the agreement Program 
Description and the related year’s Country Operational Plan (COP). In the application, the recipient will 
provide an illustrative Work Plan for the 5-year implementation period, with detailed activities described 
for the first fiscal year of the Cooperative Agreement, which will be finalized in consultation with USAID 
during the first 30 days following the awarding of the agreement. Subsequent 12-month Work Plan 
through the end of the agreement will be prepared on a 12-month fiscal year basis (October 1 – September 
30). Work plan development for subsequent years will be aligned to the OGAC/PEPFAR COP planning 
cycles that may cover the periods of April- July of each COP planning cycle. The final work plan, that 
incorporates OGAC, and USAID review recommendations should be submitted to the AOR not later than 
30 days before the close of each preceding fiscal year, e.g., August 31. USAID will have 15 days to 
provide comments. The Annual Work Plan will not be considered complete until it has been accepted in 
writing by the AOR. 

 The work plan should include, at a minimum: 

● Proposed accomplishments and expected progress towards achieving award results. 
● Timeline for implementation of the year’s proposed activities, including target completion dates. 
● Information on how activities will be implemented. 
● Personnel requirements to achieve expected outcomes. 
● Major procurements, including sub-grants. 
● Anticipated international travel. 
● Details of collaboration with other major partners. 
● Detailed budget; and, 
● Targets and anticipated results and milestone indicators against which the recipient will be 
evaluated (jointly established with the AOR and in line with the ME&L plan). 


 

 

 


NOFO 72067422RFA00006Local Entities Advancing and Driving Health Responses(LEADR) Activity

c)Quarterly Progress Reports: 
The recipient will berequired to prepare and submit performance reportsreflecting more detailed data on 
achievements against the PEPFAR and COVID-19 indicators on a quarterly, bi-annual basis in the Semi-
Annual Progress Report(SAPR), and the Annual Progress Report(APR) orasrequested by OGAC and 
USAID. These reports shall includeinformation on theagreed upon list ofindicators, targets, the results 
achieved to date and a narrative for each indicator which include reasons justifying the under oroverachievement. Narrative performance reportsshallbe submitted by emailto the AOR and the AgreementOfficer. These reports willbe used by USAID to fulfill electronic reporting requirementsofUSAID/Washington and theOffice of theGlobalAIDSCoordinator (OGAC);consequently, they need to 
conform to certain requirements. 

Quarterly reportsshould contain, at aminimum:

oProgress (activities completed, benchmarks achieved, performance standards completed)since 
thelast report by Objectives. 
oProblems encountered and whether they were solved or are still outstanding. 
oProposed solutions to newor ongoing problems.
oSuccess stories. 
oDocumentation of best practicesthat can betaken to scale; and,
oListof upcoming events with dates.
In addition to submitting the detailed report to the AOR, therecipient will be required to inputachievements directlyinto the reporting system that PEPFAR is using at thetime of reporting, whichcurrently is DATIM and the USAID Development Information System(DIS) forthe COVID-19 programs. 
The frequency of reporting into the systems depends on the program-specific indicators that the projectreports on. USAID and PEPFAR regularly provide guidance on thefrequency ofreporting foreach 
indicator. The guidance will be shared withthe recipient as it becomes available.

To simplify reporting requirements, belowis an illustrative quick reference guideto reporting deadlines. 

ReportingPeriodType of ReportScope of the ReportDue DateOctober 1-
December 31Award QuarterlyProgress ReportME&L Plan indicators and programprogress narrative aligned to award 
results areas30 after the end ofthe reporting periodPEPFAR/OGACQuarterly DATIMReportPEPFAR MER quarterly indicators and 
narrative for each indicator uploaded in 
DATIMThree weeksafter endofreporting 
periodCOVID-19 quarterlyreportUSAID COVID-19 indicators and 
narrative reportuploaded in theDevelopment Information System (DIS)
Three weeks afterthe end of thereporting periodJanuary 1-
March 30Award QuarterlyProgress ReportME&L Plan indicators and programprogressNarrative aligned to awardresults areas30 after the end ofthe reporting 
periodPEPFAR/OGACQuarterly DATIMReportPEPFAR MER quarterly indicators and 
narrative for each indicator uploaded in 
DATIMThree weeksafter endofreporting 


Reporting 

Period 

Type of Report 

Scope of the Report 

Due Date 

period 

COVID-19 quarterly 
report 

USAID COVID-19 indicators and 
narrative report uploaded in the 
Development Information System (DIS) 

Three weeks after 
the end of the 
reporting period 

April 1- June 
30 

Award Quarterly 

Progress Report 

ME&L Plan indicators and program 
progress 

Narrative aligned to award results areas 

30 after the end of 
the reporting 
period 

PEPFAR/ OGAC 
Quarterly DATIM 
Report 

PEPFAR MER quarterly indicators and 
narrative for each indicator uploaded in 
DATIM 

Three weeks 

after end of 

reporting 

period 

 

COVID-19 
quarterly report 

USAID COVID-19 indicators and narrative 
report uploaded in the Development 
Information System (DIS) 

Three weeks after 
the end of the 
reporting period 

July 1- 

September 30 

Award Quarterly 

Progress Report 

ME&L Plan indicators and program 
progress 

Narrative aligned to award results areas 

30 after the end of 
the reporting 
period 

PEPFAR/ OGAC 
Quarterly DATIM 
Report 

PEPFAR MER quarterly indicators and 
narrative for each indicator uploaded in 
DATIM 

Three weeks 

after end of 

reporting 

period 

COVID-19 quarterly 
report 

USAID COVID-19 indicators and narrative 
report uploaded in the Development 
Information System (DIS) 

Three weeks after 
the end of the 
reporting period 



 

d) High Frequency Technical Data Reporting 


 

i. This provision specifies the minimum required indicators that must be reported to the in-
country High Frequency Reporting (HFR) Point of Contact (POC), (i.e., the 
USAID/Lesotho Program Management Specialist- Strategic Information). These HFR data 
do not have to be final and may differ from what is entered into DATIM. HFR data will be 
used to track the Recipient’s progress to meeting targets; DATIM remains the official 
PEPFAR system of record. 


 

ii. Reporting Frequency – The Recipient must submit data to USAID on a monthly basis. If 
the Recipient already has systems and processes in place that allow beneficial weekly data 
collection and review, USAID recommends continuing to submit this same data in this 
format. USAID will provide a HFR reporting template to the Recipient, which is due back 
to the HFR POC as indicated in the table below. Prior to the end of each fiscal Year, the 
Calendar in paragraph (iv) below will be replaced with an equivalent calendar for each 
subsequent Fiscal Year. Quarterly submission of data into DATIM will still remain the 
official system of record for PEPFAR indicators. 


 


iii. Indicators – The set of indicators that are subject to HFR are listed below. In the event that 
the indicators require a change, the award will be modified with the mutual agreement of 
both parties. The AOR may also request additional data that is useful to monitor the 
program. The Recipient must submit the full dataset it collects per the reporting calendar in 
paragraph (iv) below, ensuring the required indicators below are included: 
○ HIV testing volume [HTS_TST] 
○ HIV positive testing volume [HTS_TST_POS] 
○ New enrollments on treatment [TX_NEW] 
○ Current cohort on treatment [TX_CURR] 
○ Multi-month dispensing [TX_MMD, TX_CURR disaggregate] 
○ VMMC services completed [VMMC_CIRC] 
○ Newly initiated on PrEP [PrEP_NEW] 





 

iv. HFR Reporting Calendar dates – 


 

FY2022 HFR CALENDAR 

Month 

Recorded Date 

if reporting weekly data 

Submission Date 

W1 

W2 

W3 

W4 

W5 

Oct 

2022-10-01 

Oct 04 

Oct 11 

Oct 18 

Oct 25 

 

Nov 15 

Nov 

2022-11-01 

Nov 01 

Nov 08 

Nov 15 

Nov 22 

Nov 29 

Dec 15 

Dec 

2022-12-01 

Dec 06 

Dec 13 

Dec 20 

Dec 27 

 

Jan 18 

Jan 

2023-01-01 

Jan 03 

Jan 10 

Jan 17 

Jan 24 

 

Feb 15 

Feb 

2023-02-01 

Jan 31 

Feb 07 

Feb 14 

Feb 21 

 

Mar 15 

Mar 

2023-03-01 

Feb 28 

Mar 07 

Mar 14 

Mar 21 

Mar 28 

Apr 15 

Apr 

2023-04-01 

Apr 04 

Apr 11 

Apr 18 

Apr 25 

 

May 16 

May 

2023-05-01 

May 02 

May 09 

May 16 

May 23 

May 30 

Jun 15 

Jun 

2023-06-01 

Jun 06 

Jun 13 

Jun 20 

Jun 27 

 

Jul 15 

Jul 

2023-07-01 

Jul 04 

Jul 11 

Jul 18 

Jul 25 

 

Aug 15 

Aug 

2023-08-01 

Aug 01 

Aug 08 

Aug 15 

Aug 22 

Aug 29 

Sep 15 

Sep 

2023-09-01 

Sep 05 

Sep 12 

Sep 19 

Sep 26 

 

Oct 17 



 

v. HFR reports must contain, at a minimum: 
● Progress (activities completed, benchmarks achieved, performance standards 
completed) since the last report by Objectives. 
● Problems encountered and whether they were solved or are still outstanding. 
● Proposed solutions to new or ongoing problems. 



● Success stories. 
● Documentation of best practices that can be taken to scale; and, 
● List of upcoming events with dates. 


 

vi. Electronic submissions are preferred over hard copy. 


 

e) Quarterly, Annual/Semi-Annual Performance Reports (APR & S/APR): The recipient will be required 
to prepare and submit performance reports reflecting more detailed data on achievements against the 
PEPFAR and COVID-19 indicators on a quarterly, bi-annual basis in the Semi-Annual Progress 
Report (SAPR), and the Annual Progress Report (APR) or as requested by OGAC and USAID. These 
reports shall include information on the agreed upon list of indicators, targets, the results achieved to 
date and a narrative for each indicator which include reasons justifying the under or over achievement. 


 

f) Consultant Reports: Scopes of work, costs, and curriculum vitae (CVs) for proposed short-term 
consultants shall be submitted to the AOR for review and approval. Additionally, consultants’ reports 
shall be sent to the AOR in a mutually agreed upon format and time frame. Sub-contracts will also 
need to be reviewed by the AOR and approved by the AO. 


 

g) Special Reports: From time to time, the recipient will be required to prepare and submit to USAID 
special reports concerning specific activities and topics. Periodically, the recipient will be requested to 
update budget and pipeline information to conform to PEPFAR/Lesotho requests. 


 

h) Final Report: At the end of the award, the recipient shall prepare a completion report which highlights 
accomplishments against work plans, gives the final status of targets, indicators, benchmarks, and 
results, addresses lessons learned during implementation and suggests ways to resolve constraints 
identified. The report may provide recommendations for follow-on work that might complement the 
completed work. 


 

i) Close-out Plan: Six months prior to the completion date of the agreement, the Recipient will submit a 
close-out plan for AOR approval. The close-out plan will include, at a minimum, an illustrative 
property disposition plan, a plan for the phase-out of in-country operations, a delivery schedule for all 
reports or other deliverables required under this agreement and a timetable for completing all required 
actions in the close out plan, including the submission date of the final property disposition plan to the 
Agreement Officer. A final project report will be due 30 days after project closeout. 


 

6. Results, Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 


 

Applicants shall provide a preliminary Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (ME&L) plan in their 
response. This plan shall identify preliminary indicators and targets, which support and contribute to the 
Lesotho health-sector national strategies, USAID COVID-19 & health standard indicators, and OGAC/ 
PEPFAR Lesotho standard indicators. Applicants should familiarize themselves with USAID and 
PEPFAR indicators appropriate to the key deliverables/results areas of this NOFO. The applicant shall 
demonstrate the data flow systems from sub-national to national levels and show how each task relates to 
indicators and targets over the life of the award. 

 

The applicant shall elaborate in the preliminary plan the expected activity results with illustrative 
indicators, mid-term milestones/benchmarks, and end-of-activity results. For each indicator, the ME&L 
plan shall provide interim and final targets, data sources, collection methods and baseline information or a 
timeline for collecting baseline information. Routine data quality assessments are also required. The 
ME&L plan should provide for a mid-term, external project assessment and describe how the assessment’s 
results will be used to make improvements. The ME&L plan should show how interventions will 


contribute to evidence-based decision making, programming, and collaboration learning, & adapting 
(CLA). 

 

Upon confirmation of the award, the successful Recipient will work in consultation with the Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR) and other USAID/ Lesotho staff to develop and execute a final ME&L 
Plan. During the initial LEADR activity mobilization period, the Recipient will work closely with the 
AOR to develop the comprehensive ME&L plan, including establishing a final list of indicators, baseline 
data and performance targets for each indicator. The Applicant should adapt its ME&L efforts based on the 
PEPFAR Monitoring, Evaluation, and Reporting (MER) indicators ( https://www.state.gov/pepfar-fy-
2022-mer-indicators/ ) (see Annex I for the PEPFAR MER indicator list attached), USAID COVID-19 
M&E framework (see Annex II for COVID-19 indicator list attached), and other relevant USG & MOH 
M&E frameworks. The ME&L plan shall be submitted to the AOR for approval within 60 days of the 
confirmation of the award. The ME&L plan will be revised as appropriate on an ongoing basis in 
collaboration with USAID and PEPFAR/Lesotho team. 

 

7. Schedule of Milestones 


 

a) The following is the Schedule of Milestones which shall be completed in compliance with the 
parameters of the program description. 
b) The accomplishment of all Milestones will be based on the successful submittal of documentation 
as specified on the following pages and completion of the tasks or deliverables delineated for those 
Milestones. 


 

Note: The Milestone plan below is an illustrative Milestone Table only. The Applicant is required to 
submit a Milestone Plan to achieve the overall objective of the program. The “Milestone Description” must 
identify and describe the completion of a task or a deliverable. The Milestone must adhere to the 
achievement of each objective. The Applicant must identify the program objective to which the milestone 
is dedicated to. The “Documentation to be submitted to USAID” is the proof of documentation or a 
description of the completed activity that led to the completion of the task. The documentation will be the 
proof that the Milestone has been completed. The “Estimated Date of Completion” is the period identified 
by the Applicant that the identified Milestone will be complete. The “Fixed Amount” is the amount that 
the Applicant will be paid after submission of the proof that the Milestone has been completed. The AO 
may amend milestones during the period of the grant, if the original milestones are no longer feasible or 
appropriate due to circumstances beyond the control of the recipient, and if the amended milestones are 
compatible with and satisfy the original purpose of the award. 

 

 

 

Continued on NEXT PAGE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

Milestone 
Number 

Milestone Description 

Documentation Submitted to 
USAID 

Estimated Date of 
Completion 

Milestone 
Payment 
Amount 

1A 

Recruitment and hiring of staff required to carry out the pilot program. 
Recommended staffing of: 

~ Senior Strategic Information Advisor 
~ Program Clerk 
~ City Program Improvement Manager 
~ District Program Improvement Manager 


Digital submission of summary 
cover page of number of staff 
recruited and copies of contracts or 
other appropriate evidence of 
hiring of staff. 

 

Within 1 month of start 
of award 

$215,000 

1B 

A change management plan for institutionalizing improved coordination 
processes approved and committed to by all relevant stakeholders. This 
plan should include consideration for communication, incident 
management, an appropriate escalation process for decisions affecting key 
stakeholders, and incorporate consideration of appropriate data for 
decision-making from MOH, PEPFAR, and other sources of relevant data. 
This change management plan should also include consideration for 
enhancing MOH’s role in bringing patients back to care. 

 Digital submission of a Microsoft 
Word document of the plan with a 
cover page confirmation of 
approval from MOH, USAID, and 
other stakeholders as deemed 
required by MOH. 

 

Within 2 months of start 
of award 

$60,000 

2 

Evidence of the Program’s support to the MOH for Back to Care activities 
to recover the number of patients on treatment from pre-lockdown 
measures. For example: mobilization of community health workers or 
PLHIV case managers to promote back to care activities or promotional 
efforts to increase decanting to eLocker program. 

Report submitted of the Program 
interventions enacted and evidence 
of Lesotho TX_CURR increased 
by at least 12,000 (which is the 
benchmark prior to lockdown 
measures). 

At the point at which the 
target is achieved within 
the duration of the 
award. 

$75,000 

3 

Coordination and facilitation of three (3) virtual or in-person work 
planning sessions with USAID partners in the xx-province hosted in 
January, April, and January 2023. This includes documented 
recommendations for USAID partner work plans and a process for 
reporting instances when USAID partners do not implement according to 
agree upon work plans. These engagements will build upon USAID’s 
existing partner management protocols to ensure alignment with the xxxx 
Province. 

 Submission of summaries and 
notes taken from each of the three 
(3) consultations. 

Within 10 months of 
start of award 

$80,000 




Milestone 
Number 

Milestone Description 

Documentation Submitted to 
USAID 

Estimated Date of 
Completion 

Milestone 
Payment 
Amount 

4 

One (1) Microsoft Word document (maximum 10 pages) of activity 
proposals that will be used for consideration for additional USAID 
COVID-specific funding. Successful review of proposals is subject to the 
availability of additional COVID-19 funding and should be considered for 
the Lesotho program. 

Submission of one (1) Word 
Document of activity proposals for 
COVID-19 funding. 

Within 4 months of the 
start of award 

$20,000 

5 

 

Submission of Word Document of 
activity proposals. 

Within 6 months of start 
of award 

$50,000 

 

 

 

TOTAL 

$500,000 




 

 

8. Environmental Protection and Compliance 


 

a. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include environmental sustainability as a 
central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate is 
codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) 
Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200), which, in part, require that the 
potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to 
proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. The recipient’s 
environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are specified here. 
b. In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless otherwise 
directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID regulations, the 
latter shall govern. 
c. No activity funded under this Fixed Amount Award will be implemented unless an environmental 
threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented 
in a request for categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 
(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved regulation 216 environmental 
documentation.”) 
d. As part of its initial Implementation Plan/ Work plan, and all Annual Implementation Plans thereafter, 
the Recipient, in collaboration with the USAID AOR and Regional Mission Environmental Officer or 
Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities under 
this Fixed Amount Award to determine if they are within the scope of approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation. 
e. If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID review 
and approval for such new environmental documentation amendments. 
f. Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 


 

An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) has been approved for USAID’s work in Lesotho. A 
summary of its findings are as follows: the interventions proposed under this program are expected to 
have no significant impact on the environment. However, particular attention will be paid to the 
recommendations from the IEE made for USAID/SA RHO and the Bureau Mission Environmental 
Officer, which is classified under the USAID/Southern African Regional Development Cooperation 
Strategy (RDCS) Development Objective 3: Resilience of People and Systems Advanced through 
Intermediate Result 3.2: Equitable Provision of Quality Health and Other Services Improved, and 
Intermediate Result 3.3: Citizen Participation and Leadership Increased. 

 

The approved IEE is from the period of FY 2019 – FY 2026 and continues to align to the Foreign 
Assistance Framework and additional considerations for activities implemented in response to the COVID-
19 pandemic, which were not previously considered in the former IEE. This IEE does not address water 
and sanitation-related health activities or use of pesticides, support for which would require amendment of 
this IEE. 

 

The IEE recommended Categorical Exclusion for the HIV/AIDS activities listed below because no 
environmental impacts are expected as a result of these activities. This fall under the following citations 


from Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Regulation 216 (22 CFR 216), subparagraph 2(c) (2) as 
classes of activities that do not require an initial environmental examination: 

● Support, strengthen and collaborate with community-based HIV adherence groups, Community-
Based Organizations (CBOs) and Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) to mobilize awareness of 
and demand for HIV prevention, care, and treatment services 
● Support community-based outreach teams to provide information and education and improve 
bidirectional information and referral systems between community and health care facilities. 
● Develop and improve the utilization of community-based health information systems to track 
community/facility referral. 
● Support the integration of other health related information relevant to HIV prevention (i.e., 
nutrition) into community-based information and education activities. 
● Capacity building and practical skills training for community and clinical health care workers for 
improved delivery of HIV/AIDS and TB testing and prevention services. 
● Integrate nutrition assessments, counseling, and support HIV & TB care and treatment to detect 
and prevent malnutrition and support strengthening treatment efficacy 
● Implement continuous quality improvement approaches to promote adherence and improve health 
outcomes e.g., sustained viral suppression, TB care, and reduction in new infections. 
● Assist USAID-supported districts to develop District Implementation Plans using data analytics 
● Strengthen district-level workforce planning and development. 


 

While the above activities are categorically excluded from further environmental scrutiny, the IEE 
amendment nevertheless recommends that environmental health and quality considerations be incorporated 
into all relevant steps along the health care continuum, as part of quality assurance and infection 
prevention approaches. To this end, the Program Element 3.1.1 under the Program Area 3.1 has an 
opportunity to include health care waste management messages, and to provide for appropriate disposal 
facilities in home-based care and community-based situations. Positive messages about personal and 
household hygiene, sanitation, and proper disposal of condoms and other potentially harmful materials 
should be delivered, as appropriate, along with the standard health care messages. 

 

A Negative Determination with Conditions pursuant to 22 CFR 216.3(a) (2) (iii) is recommended for the 
following activities that have potential for negative impact on the environment in the following categories: 

 

HIV/AIDS Prevention, care, and treatment activities: 

● Distribution of food parcels received from the World Food Program to Orphans and 
Vulnerable Children. 
● Condom distribution for HIV prevention 
● Provision of Voluntary Male Medical Circumcision (VMMC) and Pre-exposure prophylaxis 
(PrEP) services for HIV prevention 
● Provision of prevention of mother-to-child-transmission of HIV (PMTCT) services 
● Supply chain management and commodity quantification 
● Distribution of HIV self-testing kits at health facility and community levels 
● Increase availability of and improve HIV and TB diagnostic procedures 
● Provision of Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) and anti-TB medications and other related drugs 
for treatment of HIV/AIDS and TB 
● Improved delivery of and expanded access to integrated TB/HIV services and improved 
management of TB/HIV co-infection 
● Differentiated Service Delivery (DSD) models to promote people-centered care (e.g., infants, 
pregnant women, men, adolescent girls, and young women). 
● Implement routine Early Warning Indicators and strengthen pharmacovigilance. 



● Strengthen the clinic-lab interface to improve pre-analytical, analytical, and post analytical 
phases of specimen collection and viral load documentation 
● Minor renovations and construction to existing health care facilities as needed and provision of 
temporary facilities as needed (e.g., mobile clinics, park homes). 


 

Activities for COVID-19 Prevention and impact mitigation: 

● Community engagement and demand creation for COVID-19 prevention, vaccine access, and 
service delivery. 
● Risk Communication and engagement for COVID-19 prevention, vaccine access, and risk 
mitigation. 
● COVID-19 Vaccine promotion. 
● Communications on public management of infectious disease and procurement of medical 
supplies. 
● Support or provide technical assistance to develop processes, SOPs, and standards for specimen 
transport, laboratory diagnostics, and services. 
● Training, technical assistance, and capacity building of professional and paraprofessionals on 
laboratory establishment and/or operation. 
● Operation of a laboratory including all critical components such as procurement, storage, 
management, and disposal of laboratory commodities and samples, including, but not limited to 
diagnostic kits, laboratory supplies, reagents, and discarded PPE. 
● Contribution to research of vaccine and treatment protocol development. 
● Support or provide technical assistance to develop processes, SOPs, and standards for aspects of 
healthcare such as waste management, disinfection, specimen transport and storage, rapid 
diagnostics, and service delivery 
● Training, technical assistance, and capacity building of health care workers, community healthcare 
workers, and volunteers in PPE use, waste management, procurement, storage, and disposal of 
commodities, and disinfection. 
● Procurement or logistics support (distribution and transport) for healthcare commodities, 
diagnostic kits, PPE, and equipment for response to emerging threats. 
● COVID-19 Contact Tracing. 
● Assessment of incineration and waste disposal capacity for health entities to ensure proper 
disposal and limit vectors of disease via improperly managed healthcare waste. 
● Procurement, distribution, and use of waste management equipment and systems. 
● Infection control and prevention and provision of PPE for health care providers. 
● Supply Chain management through procurement of buffer stocks of oxygen, oxygen cylinders, 
medicines, and supplies for COVID-19 case management. 


 

 

[END OF SECTION F – FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

Points of contact (POC) for questions while the funding opportunity is open are Agreement Officer Nya 
Kwai Boayue nboayue@usaid.gov and Senior Acquisition and Assistance Specialist Hanifa Noor at 
hnoor@usaid.gov. 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all organizations who 
are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for additional information: 
https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement Officer is the 
only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. Any award 
and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to 
Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used by the 
U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in 
part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made as a result 
of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have the right to 
duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This restriction does 
not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from 
another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert 
sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 

 

 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 – CONCEPT PAPER TEMPLATE 

 

Concept Papers must comply with the following: 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent sections. 
Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 12-point 
Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted in 
Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section C of this NOFO must be used in the cost application. 
● The Concept Paper must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as appropriate. 


 

A. Concept Paper Cover Page 


 

The cover page must include: 

i. NOFO Number: 72067422RFA00006 
ii. The Activity title. 
iii. Name of applicant organization. 
iv. Address of applicant organization. 
v. Type of organization (e.g., for-profit, non-profit, university, etc.). 
vi. Point of contact (lead contact name, title, telephone, e-mail). 
vii. The Tax Identification Number (TIN) and/or Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) numbers of the 
Prime Applicant. Name of the organization(s) submitting the application. 


(a) Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address). 


Name of any known proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the organizations are local 
or regional organizations as defined in this NOFO. 

1. Period of Performance (i.e., start date and end date): ________________________________ 


 

2. Total Program Amount (in USDs): _______________________________________________ 


 

3. Total Amount of Funding Requested from USAID and total amount of cost share or leverage (if 
applicable), including from what source(s): _________________________________________ 


 

4. Full Address for Applicant Organization: __________________________________________ 


 

5. Type of Organization [please include certification of incorporation] (e.g., US, non-US, multilateral, 
private, for-profit, nonprofit, etc.) date of incorporation, etc.): 
______________________________________________________________________________ 


 


6. (If Applicable) Name(s) of Partner(s) Organization(s) will name Sub-partners here): ____________ 


B. Concept Introduction: (approximately 1 page). Identify the problem your organization will address, 
linking it to one or more of the NOFO’s focus areas and briefly describe your organization’s intervention 
for tackling this problem. Describe why there is a strategic need for your organization’s concept, how it 
differs from alternatives, and any relevant partner-specific considerations for the problem or solution. 

C. Beneficiaries: (approximately ½ page). Describe the types of benefits the intervention will produce and 
the types and range of people who will benefit from this intervention. Was the concept designed with end 
user input? Has it been, or can it be, adapted to reach women and men, indigenous people, ethnic and/or 
religious minorities, and youth? How can the concept be scaled up to reach more people? 

D. Geographic Location: (approximately ½ page). In what location(s) (e.g., Province, city, country, etc.) 
is your organization proposing to operate? Describe key elements of, and actors in, the geographic 
location(s) in which your organization proposes to work. What are the biggest challenges and 
opportunities? Please provide a brief description of your organization’s previous work experience in this 
geographic location. 

E. Intervention approach: (approximately one [1] page). Building on the introduction, propose an 
approach for how this intervention will produce the desired impact in the focus area(s) identified. Briefly 
describe critical barrier(s) or problem(s) related to the focus area(s) that your organization’s concept 
addresses. Be sure to include information describing why the approach is creative or innovative, how it is 
potentially scalable, and evidence to support it as a tested solution or as an intervention likely to have a 
significant development impact in the health sector and how it will be sustained. 

F. Intervention results: (approximately one [1] page). As specifically as possible, describe the 
anticipated outputs, outcomes, results and/or impact of the proposed intervention. What is the key, 
quantifiable metrics related to your organization’s project’s performance or expected performance? What 
is the scale needed to achieve results sufficient to address the problem? What are the baselines that your 
organization will measure before the project begins? 

G. (If applicable) Partner roles: (approximately ½ page). Describe and define the role of other entities in 
the partnership. This must include a description of the leveraged funding, if necessary, or sub-partners if 
submitting a mentorship program. It must describe how this meets the criteria in Section C of the LEADR 
NOFO. If your organization is not proposing any partners, this section can be empty. 

H. Applicant capacity: (approximately ½ page). Describe organizational capacity – technical, 
managerial, financial, etc. – to carry out the proposed intervention. What is the business model for your 
organization’s intervention? Have you worked in this sector previously? If your organization is applying 
to mentor local and underutilized partners, describe the organization’s credibility within targeted 
communities, and a demonstrable commitment to addressing the health program areas within the context 
of programs already providing other health services. 

Signature of authorized individual 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that is 
selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for non-U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. The award will also contain “required as applicable” Standard Provisions. (Note: the full 
text of these provisions may be found at: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab) 

 

 


ANNEX 3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

ADS Automated Directives System 

AGYW Adolescent Girls and Young Women 

AHD Advanced HIV Disease 

AO Agreement Officer 

AOR Agreement Officer’s Representative 

ART Antiretroviral Therapy 

CAGS Community ART Groups 

CBO Community-Based Organization 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

CLA Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting 

COP Chief of Party 

CQI Collaborative Quality Improvement 

DDD Decentralized Drug Distribution 

DHMT District Health Management Team 

DUNS Data Universal Numbering System 

FAA Fixed Amount Award 

FBO Faith-Based Organization 

FP Family Planning 

FP/RH Family Planning and Reproductive Health 

GBV Gender-Based Violence 

GH USAID’s Bureau for Global Health 

GOL Government of Lesotho 

HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus 

HTS HIV Testing Services 

HRH Human Resources for Health 

IEE Initial Environmental Examination 

IPC Infection Prevention and Control 

IPV Intimate Partner Violence 

IR Intermediate Result 

KP Key Populations 

LEADR Local Entities Advancing and Driving Health Responses 

LEEP Loop Electrosurgical Excision Procedure 

LePHIA Lesotho Population-based HIV Impact Assessment 

MCHN Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition 

MEL Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 

MIP Mother- Infant Pair 

MMD Multi-Month Dispensing 

MOH Ministry of Health 

MRC Merit Review Committee 

NACS Nutrition Assessment Counseling and Support 

NCD Non-Communicable Disease 

NDVP National Deployment and Vaccination Plan 

NGO Non-governmental Organization 

NSP National HIV/AIDS strategic plan 

NOFO Notice Of Funding Opportunity 

OVC Orphans and Vulnerable Children 

PEP Post-Exposure Prophylaxis 

PEPFAR President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 


PLHIV People Living with HIV/AIDS 

PMTCT Prevention of Mother-To-Child Transmission of HIV 

POC Point-of-Care 

PPE Personal Protective Equipment 

PrEP Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis 

QA/QC Quality Control/Quality Assurance 

RCCE Risk Communication and Community Engagement 

RDCS Regional Development Cooperation Strategy 

RMNCAH Reproductive Maternal Newborn Child and Adolescent Health 

SAM System for Award Management 

SDP Service Delivery Point 

SBCC Social and Behavior Change Communication 

STI Sexually Transmitted Infection 

TB Tuberculosis 

TOC Theory of Change 

TPT Tuberculosis Preventive Therapy 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

USD US Dollars 

USG United States Government 

U=U Undetectable equals Untransmissible 

WHO World Health Organization 

YPAT Youth Programming Assessment Tool 

 

 

 

 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

 

 

 

 


