 

Icon
Description automatically generated 


Issue Date: August 3, 2022 

Deadline for Question: August 12, 2022, 17:00 hours East African Time (EAT) 

Closing Date: September 19, 2022 

Closing Time: 17:00 hours EAT 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), Request for Application Number 
72062122RFA00005 

 

Program Title: Comprehensive Child Centered Care And Services (C4s) Activity 

Federal Assistance Listing Number: 98.001 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Tanzania (USAID/Tanzania) 
is seeking applications for a Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the 
Tanzania Malaria Surveillance Activity program. Eligibility for this award is restricted to Local 
Non-U.S. Organizations. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO 
thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and 
selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. USAID 
bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. If you 
have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable Unique 
Entity Identifier (UEI) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section 
D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 


Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part 
of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation 
or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of 
the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID/Tanzania programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

Dennis Foster 

Agreement Officer 

 

 

Attachments: 

Attachment 1: Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) 

Attachment 2: International Travel related to Visa Renewal 

Attachment 3: Past Performance Information (PPI) 

Attachment 4: Value Added Tax Allowability Guidance 

Attachment 5: Work Permit and Residence Permit Tips for Implementing Partners 

Attachment 6: Allowability and Value added Tax on De Minimis Purchases 

Attachment 7: EMMP Template 

 

 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description…………………………………………………………. 6 

Section B – Federal Award Information…………………………………………………. 23 

Section C – Eligibility Information ……………………………………………………… 26 

Section D – Application and Submission Information…………………………………… 27 

Section E – Application Review Information…………………………………………….. 40 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information…………………………………. 45 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts………………………………………… 53 

Section H – Other Information ……………………………………………………………54 

ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE………………………………..67 

ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS…………………………………………68 

 


ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AMELP 

Activity Monitoring Evaluation and Learning 

APRA 

America Rescue Plan 

AGYW 

Adolescent Girls and Young Women 

ART 

Antiretroviral Therapy 

BMC 

Bugando Medical Center 

C/ALHIV 

Children/ Adolescent Living with Human Immunodeficiency Virus 

C4S 

Comprehensive Children Centered Care and Support 

CDCS 

Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

CLA 

Collaboration Learning Adapting 

COE 

Center Of Excellence 

CLHIV 

Children Living With HIV 

CRM 

Climate Risk Management 

COP 

Country Operation Plan 

CSO 

Civil Society Organization 

DE 

Developmental Evaluation 

DO 

Development Objective 

DP 

Development Partners 

eMTCT 

Elimination of Mother To child Transmission 

FASTER 

Faith-based Action for Scaling up Testing and treatment for Epidemic 
Response 

GBV 

Gender Based Violence 

GFATM 

Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria 

GoT 

Government of Tanzania 

HTS HIV 

HIV Testing Services 

HEI HIV 

HIV Exposed Infants 

HFR 

High Frequency Reporting 

HIV 

Human Immunodeficiency Virus 

IEE 

Initial environmental impact assessment 

MCHN 

Maternal Child Health and Nutrition 

MEL 

Monitoring Evaluation and Learning 

MOH 

Ministry of Health 

MRH 

Mbeya Referral Hospital 

NSGPR 

National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction 

NBS 

National Bureau of Statistics 

NTD 

Neglected Tropical Diseases 

OGAC 

Office of Global AIDS Coordinator 

OVC 

Orphans and vulnerable children 

PBFW 

Pregnant and Breast-Feeding Women 

PEPFAR 

President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 

PLHIV 

People Living with Human Immunodeficiency Virus 

PMTCT 

Prevention of mother-to-child Transmission of HIV 

PMP 

Performance Monitoring Plan 

PPR 

Performance Plan reporting 

PO-RALG 

President’s Office – Regional Administration and Local Government 

PrEP 

Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis 




SIMS 

Site Improvement Monitoring System 

SRH 

Sexual Reproductive Health 

TDHS 

Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey 

THIS 

Tanzania Health Information Survey 

TPT 

Tuberculosis Preventive Therapy 

USAID 

United States Agency for International Development 

VAC 

Violence Against Children 

WHO 

World Health Organization 

UNAIDS 

United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 

UNICEF 

United Nations Children's Fund 

USG 

United States Government 



 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID 
Supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as additional requirements for local partners. 

 

A. OVERVIEW 

 

The overall goal of the Comprehensive Child Centered Care and Services (C4S) activity (“The 
Activity'') is to ensure health facilities in priority areas provide high quality integrated pediatric 
HIV services and that children and adolescents are able to access comprehensive health and other 
services. Specifically, this activity will provide technical assistance to end mother-to-child-
transmission of HIV (eMTCT) by supporting pregnant and breastfeeding women (PBFW) and 
their HIV-exposed infants (HEI), close the HIV treatment gap for children and adolescents living 
with HIV (C/ALHIV) and drive TB elimination and well-being for C/ALHIV in Tanzania. The 
Activity will ensure the continued delivery of HIV services for PBFW, HEI, and C/ALHIV at two 
pediatric centers of excellence (COE) and support these COEs to serve as hubs for service 
delivery and clinical capacity building. This activity will advance support to the National AIDS 
Control Programme (NACP) and the National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Programme (NTLP) to 
end HIV and TB among children and adolescents aged 0-19 years old and inform policy decisions 
and discussions at the national level with the Ministry of Health, Community Development, 
Gender, Elderly and Children and other key stakeholders and will coordinate implementation. 

 

C4S will build on the successes and previous experiences of Afya Bora Mtoto Imara towards 
eMTCT, achieving UNAIDS 95-95-95 targets1 for children and adolescents living with HIV in 
Tanzania, increasing TB prevention and treatment achievements, and bolster achievements made 
through the FASTER mechanism2. C4S will complement other USAID health activities that 
support service delivery, health systems strengthening, orphans and vulnerable children, and 
social and behavior change, as well as USAID efforts in other sectors, notably education. 

1 https://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/201506_JC2743_Understanding_FastTrack_en.pdf 

2 https://www.crs.org/sites/default/files/20os-217091_faster_fact_sheet_final_1.pdf 

3 USAID Tanzania, CDCS, 2020-2025. 

 

The activity directly contributes to the achievement of USAID Tanzania’s Country Development 
and Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) Development Objective (DO) 1: “Foundational skills of 
children 0-15 years achieved” and DO 3, “capacity of state and non-state actors strengthened to 
benefit future generations”.3 

 

The expected period of performance for this Activity is five (5) years. 

 

 

 

 


B. BACKGROUND 

 

Strategic Context 

Challenges to a nation’s health and wellbeing, whether it is the HIV epidemic, the burden of TB 
or more recently the COVID-19 pandemic, underscore the necessity of rapid response by local 
organizations to support integrated health services in coordination with community systems. 
Efforts to address these challenges must both catalyze the current and future USAID pediatric 
health priorities and foster sustainable systems that deliver quality comprehensive services for 
PBFW, children and adolescents living with HIV (C/ALHIV), and their families in the long term. 

 

The Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children has prioritized 
health and well-being for children, adolescents and their families at facility and community levels. 
The National AIDS Control Programme prioritizes comprehensive and client-centered services as 
an effective and efficient means to achieve 95-95-95 for C/ALHIV aged 0-19 years old and 
strengthen the social welfare systems. 

 

Tanzania is a high HIV and TB burden country globally, with a large number of new child 
infections and pediatric treatment gap.4 HIV prevalence is slowly declining but Tanzania has not 
yet achieved epidemic control and continues to experience disproportionately high rates of AIDS 
related mortality for children 0-14 years with 0.4% prevalence with an estimated 8,300 deaths.5,6 
Mother to child transmission (MTCT) has stalled at 11%, resulting in an estimated 10,000 new 
child infections each year.6 

4 Pediatric HIV Treatment Gaps in 7 East and Southern African Countries: Examination of Modeled, Survey, and 
Routine Program Data. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2018;78:S134–S141 

5 Tanzania HIV Impact Survey, 2017. Published, December 2018. 

6 UNAIDS, 2020, https://aidsinfo.unaids.org/. 

7 https://healthgap.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Sauti-Yetu-COP21-%E2%80%94-Our-Voices-Tanzania.pdf 

8 https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Tanzania_TBRM21_TB_DIAH_Version_Final.pdf 

 

National leaders identified the following key gaps for C/ALHIV in Tanzania: inequitable access 
and low coverage of ART and TB services, inadequate capacity of health workers and caregivers 
to provide quality care, weak integration of HIV with other disease programs such as Neglected 
Tropical diseases (NTDs), child health and nutrition, and into community programs, and sub-
optimal use of and compliance to national HIV management policies and SOPs at the facility 
level. Community leaders corroborated these gaps as documented to PEPFAR Tanzania in their 
presentation to PEPFAR Tanzania COP Planning titled “Sauti Yetu”, the PEOPLE’S COP 21. 
Among numerous recommendations, notably HIV advocates called for greater treatment literacy 
for caregivers of C/ALHIV and PLHIV-led support to services, especially for ALHIV and 
PMTCT.7 

 

In 2021, the National TB and Leprosy Programme (NTLP) and USAID joined to create the 
annual roadmap to end TB in Tanzania.8 Core approaches include continued progress to reach 
undiagnosed clients, engage all care providers at facility and community level, to cure diagnosed 
clients including those with drug susceptible and multi-drug resistant TB, and to prevent TB 
among household contacts and PLHIV. The NTLP has highlighted significant pediatric TB gaps, 


including low TPT coverage among CLHIV, low (< 50%) TPT completion rates, and inadequate 
knowledge of the benefits of TPT among adolescent clients and parents/caregivers. 

 

USAID/Tanzania 

 

HIV and TB Response 

 

USAID/Tanzania currently supports the delivery of comprehensive HIV and TB prevention, care 
and treatment services for pediatric and adult populations with PEPFAR funding, and in 
collaboration with partners including the Global Fund to Fight HIV, TB, and Malaria, as 
coordinated by the Ministry of Health (MOH). USAID Boresha Afya, ACHIEVE, DREAMS, and 
Afya Bora Mtoto Imara, police and prison activities provide comprehensive services across 20 
regions of Tanzania. Key accomplishments include sustaining a growing cohort of PLHIV on 
treatment with increasing viral suppression rates, continued scaling of differentiated service 
delivery and multi-month dispensation of optimized ART, and the approval of the national PrEP 
framework and rapid scale up of PrEP access and service delivery. 

 

The main challenges related to eMTCT and pediatric HIV care include reducing vertical 
transmission of HIV disease from mother to infant by ensuring PBFW are diagnosed, remain on 
treatment and are virally suppressed, enhancing pediatric case identification, case management, 
and treatment continuity.9 Key policy changes that could reduce barriers to pediatric services 
include increasing awareness of the recently lowered age of consent to testing for adolescents, 
currently at 15 years old10, enabling pediatric populations to access HIV self-tests for screening in 
HIV affected households, and allowing stable PBFW and CLHIV <5 years of age to access multi-
month dispensing of antiretroviral treatment (ART). 

9 OGAC Planning Level Letter 2022. https://www.state.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/01/COP22PLL_FINAL_TANZANIA_01.19.22.pdf 

10 UNAIDS Press Center, 2019. 

 

The C4S Activity will build on the gains made under the pediatric Boresha Afya and Afya Bora 
Mtoto Imara projects, with the aim of reducing inequities in HIV services and treatment coverage. 
The C4S Activity will closely collaborate with OVC Project Kizazi Hodari and ACHIEVE to 
ensure a whole-of-child response with a continuum of care from facility to community. 

 

COVID-19 Response 

 

USAID Tanzania has received American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funding to provide essential 
health services during the COVID-19 pandemic, support critical case management including 
oxygen therapy, surveillance, laboratory quality improvement, infection prevention and control, 
and increasing COVID-19 vaccination. 

 

 

 

 


Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition, Family Planning and Neglected Tropical Diseases 

 

COVID-19 has impacted maternal and child health and nutrition (MCHN) services and their 
recovery is slow, especially in Tanzania where accelerated efforts are needed to reduce maternal, 
newborn and child mortality, invigorate returns to improve nutritional outcomes among children 
under 5, and fill the gap in unmet need for family planning.11 Clients have multiple preventative, 
screening, and curative service needs that change as they transition through life. Child-centered 
care and services should address their needs where they are most effectively, including in school 
health screening activities and into the community, with their families. Neglected tropical disease 
investments should be leveraged to benefit C/ALHIV.12 

11 https://www.usaid.gov/actingonthecall/2021-report 

12 https://allafrica.com/stories/202202020089.html 

13 USAID Tanzania, CDCS, 2020-2025. https://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/cdcs 

14 UNAIDS, 2021. https://www.unaids.org/en/Global-AIDS-Strategy-2021-2026 

 

Country Development Cooperation Strategy 2020-2025 

 

The USAID Tanzania Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) envisions that If 
children are healthy, well-nourished, educated, and supported by their caregivers and 
communities, then they will have the necessary foundational skills to become productive young 
adults, well-positioned to pursue and achieve their aspirations. 

 

The activity will primarily support the achievement of USAID/Tanzania’s Country Development 
Cooperative Strategy (CDCS) Development Objective 1: “Foundational skills of children 0-15 
years achieved” with specific contributions to IRs 1.2 (household nutrition and health outcomes 
improved), and 1.3 (safe and supportive community structures enhanced). The activity will also 
contribute to Development Objective 3 (capacity of state and non-state actors strengthened to 
benefit future generations) especially IR 3.1 (capacity of sub-national governments to lead 
sustainable development improved) and 3.3 (capacity of civil society actors strengthened). A 
limited contribution will be made to IR 2.1 (health and education outcomes improved for 15–19-
year-old).13 

 

C. STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT WITH GOVERNMENT PRIORITIES 

 

The C4S will align to the National Health Sector HIV Strategic Plan V 2021-2026 (HSHSP V), 
which builds upon global HIV14 priorities and focuses on tailored interventions including 
appropriate differentiated service delivery (DSD) models at PMTCT sites, maternal retesting, 
engagement of men and mentor mothers for eMTCT (impact and intervention area 3), pediatric 
HIV services (intervention area 19), adolescent HIV services (intervention area 20), TB/HIV 
integration (intervention area 21), and HIV integration with other diseases (intervention area 22). 
The HSHSP V emphasizes on multi-sectoral approach, for addressing comprehensive needs of 
adolescents with HIV as the entry point but also focuses on sexual reproductive health, mental 
health, nutrition education and soft skills development for economic activities. 

 


In 2021, the National TB and Leprosy Programme (NTLP) and USAID joined to create a 
roadmap to end TB in Tanzania.15 Core approaches include continued progress to reach 
undiagnosed clients, engage all care providers at facility and community level, to cure diagnosed 
clients including those with drug susceptible and multi-drug resistant TB, and to prevent TB 
among household contacts and PLHIV. The National TB and Leprosy Strategic Plan VI (2020-
2025) aligns very well with the USAID Strategy for TB. Both of these strategies are focused 
around patient-centered care. Importantly, children have special consideration rather than being 
considered as small adults. The Core approaches for the USAID strategy are to reach TB 
undiagnosed clients by addressing barriers in access and utilization of TB services including 
childhood TB; engage all care providers at facility and community level to treat and cure 
diagnosed clients (including children) for both those with drug susceptible and multi-drug 
resistant TB; use local evidence based solutions and global recommendations to prevent both 
drug-sensitive and drug-resistance TB in all geographical areas for all population groups 
including children. 

15 https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Tanzania_TBRM21_TB_DIAH_Version_Final.pdf 

 

Sustainability: 

 

For effective implementation and sustaining the gains in pediatric centers of excellence, C4S will 
implement interventions in close coordination with the President's Office, Regional 
Administration (PORALG) and Ministry of Health. The recipient will prioritize whenever 
possible to use existing Government of Tanzania monitoring systems and support strengthening 
these systems to be more responsible to current and future needs. 

In addition, C4S will build their implementation strategy with the foundation of sustainability and 
provide a Sustainability Plan as an annex to its work plan, which will be updated annually and 
contain milestones related to institutional capacity building and the generation of financial and in-
kind resources from public and private stakeholders to complement implementation and sustain 
the gains of the activity. The Sustainability Plan might include, for example, a strategy for 
generating revenue for outreach services provided to international and local stakeholders, 
innovations such as fee-based telemedicine and virtual training, or premium care patient rooms 
for customers able to pay. The Sustainability Plan should embrace a market-based approach to 
eventual self-reliance. Ideally, the Recipient will demonstrate measurable functional and financial 
transition toward sustainability no later than the beginning of Year 4. 

 

D. ACTIVITY PURPOSE TECHNICAL APPROACH AND EXPECTED RESULTS 

 

Purpose: 

 

USAID is seeking to partner with one (1) local organization that provides PMTCT and pediatric 
services and values a family approach to address the immediate HIV and TB technical assistance 
needs preventing Tanzania from achieving equitable epidemic control, amidst evolving pediatric 
COVID-19 needs. 

 


Goal: 

The goal of the Comprehensive Child Centered Care and Services activity is: 

 

Improved health status of pregnant and breastfeeding women, HIV exposed infants, 
children and adolescents living with HIV in Tanzania through increased access to quality 
comprehensive child centered health care and support. 

 

Development Hypothesis: 

USAID’s development hypothesis is: 

IF technical assistance is provided to expand access to quality comprehensive child-centered 
health services, 

AND IF national policies and systems are strengthened to improve C/ALHIV outcomes, 

AND IF pediatric centers of excellence model quality comprehensive child-centered care. 

THEN the health status of children and adolescents living with HIV will be improved. 

 

Objectives: 

1. Provide technical assistance to health facilities to increase access to quality comprehensive 
child-centered health services 
2. Strengthen national policies and systems to improve C/ALHIV outcomes 
3. Sustain quality HIV and TB services to C/ALHIV at pediatric centers of excellence 


 

A results framework reflecting the Activity goal, purpose, objectives, and intermediate results is 
displayed below. 

 

Results Framework: 

Objective 1: Provide technical 
assistance to health facilities to 
expand access to quality 
comprehensive child-centered HIV, 
TB and other health services 

Objective 2: Strengthen national 
policies and systems to improve 
C/ALHIV outcomes 

Objective 3: Pediatric centers 
of excellence (COEs) model 
quality comprehensive child-
centered care 

IR 1.1: Reduce MTCT rates and 
close the pediatric HIV treatment 
gap 

IR 2.1: Support national HIV and 
TB policies for Children and 
Adolescents enhanced to achieve 
and sustain epidemic control 

IR 3.1: Sustain comprehensive 
pediatric HIV care and 
treatment for 0–19-year-olds at 
COEs 

IR 1.2: Optimize quality, client-
centered differentiated services, 
including TB, for 
pregnant/breastfeeding women, HEI 
and C/ALHIV 

IR 2.2: Support integrated social 
service systems for children and 
adolescent health and wellbeing, 
including OVCs 

IR 3.2: Build the capacity of 
staff from other health facilities 
in pediatric HIV at COEs 

IR 1.3: Facilitate C/ALHIV to 
access comprehensive integrated 
services related to TB, nutrition, 
immunization, NTDs, COVID-19, 
and SRH. 

IR 2.3: Enhance linkages and 
bidirectional referral systems 
between projects to optimize 
resources for children and 
adolescents 

 




Technical Approach: 

 

C4S will employ a sustainable data-driven approach that strategically provides technical 
assistance to reach C/ALHIV (0-19 years old), their families and community, care providers, and 
systems. This activity will achieve the greatest return on investment by building on past 
successful experiences in the regions identified in Section E, focusing efforts on the districts and 
facilities in these regions that have gaps in service delivery in order to address these gaps. 

 

C4S should operate in a manner that is sustainable and accountable, and which supports the 
provision of quality technical assistance in a contextually appropriate manner. C4S will provide 
above site support to the Ministry of Health to strengthen their pediatric health workforce and 
systems to address HIV, TB, and COVID-19. C4S will support the NTLP's efforts to end pediatric 
TB through improvement of pediatric TB diagnosis, preventive care and treatment. C4S will also 
support demonstrable linkages to integrated primary health care services including immunization, 
management of diarrhea, pneumonia, nutrition, neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), sexual and 
reproductive health services, and relevant community socio-economic support systems. 

 

Objective 1: Provide technical assistance to expand access to quality comprehensive child-
centered health services 

 

C4S will be expected to strategically implement technical assistance activities to prevent and treat 
HIV and TB in children, adolescents, and pregnant and breastfeeding mothers. These 
supplemental resources should increase pediatric HIV and TB treatment coverage and service 
access, optimize client-centered services for C/ALHIV and PMTCT, and facilitate access to 
comprehensive integrated services for C/ALHIV. 

 

Technical assistance must not only adhere to international standards and evidence-based practices, 
but also reflect Tanzania national guidelines and algorithms, and PEPFAR annual guidance and 
directives.16 Support to priority sites should enhance results and ensure coordination with ministry 
and implementing partner staff to achieve high yield and cost-effective assistance, designed for 
future sustainability. Investments to support health care providers, parents/caregivers, and 
community health workers should strengthen the continuum of HIV care and facilitate child and 
adolescent wellness services safely in the context of COVID-19. Integrated well-child and well-
adolescent services include nutrition, SRH, screening for NTDs, and COVID-19 mitigation. 

16 https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/COP22-Guidance-Final_508-Compliant.pdf 

 

IR 1.1 Reduce MTCT rates and close the pediatric HIV treatment gap 

 

C4S will be expected to strategically implement technical assistance activities to close the 
pediatric HIV treatment gap. Support should expedite identifying and enrolling treatment naive 
clients, or welcoming clients back to treatment that have interrupted care in priority geographies 
(see Section E). C/ALHIV requires caregiver support and case management to ensure they are 
supported early in care and can adhere at home and in school to attain and sustain viral 
suppression. 


 

C4S will also be expected to provide technical assistance that optimizes existing PMTCT services 
that have not continued to reduce the number of HIV exposed infants, or the rate of HIV 
seroconversion during pregnancy, delivery, through breastfeeding to a final status determination. 
Assistance efforts should seek to break through stalled progress to identify key quality 
improvement measures, facilitate maternal re-testing and PrEP access, understand human resource 
capabilities and streamline provider workflows, as well as engage with clients/peer PLHIV 
leaders to find sustainable solutions. 

 

IR 1.2 Optimize quality, client-centered differentiated services, including TB, for 
pregnant/breastfeeding women, HEI and C/ALHIV 

 

C4S will provide technical assistance to enhance child-centered differentiated service delivery 
models to sustain progress towards 95-95-95 for mothers in PMTCT, children and adolescents. 
Critical components of success ensure access to optimized ARVs, reliable laboratory (viral load) 
services, realistic provider workloads, and respect clients' agency in their care decisions, which 
for children includes their parents and caregivers, and assenting ALHIV that can successfully 
transition to adult treatment. Technical assistance should ensure that returning and newly 
identified C/ALHIV have models that ensure a successful start on treatment, and the psychosocial 
support to adhere at home and in school to achieve and then sustain viral suppression. For 
children, services should ensure that parents/caregivers have the skills to support adherence 
through ARV regimen changes. Support could include digital innovations for client/caregiver or 
provider benefit to simplify HIV and TB care schedules and adhere to COVID-19 safety 
measures.17 C4S will also address pediatric TB through improvement of pediatric TB diagnosis, 
preventive care and treatment. 

17 https://www.usaid.gov/usaid-digital-strategy 2020-2024 

 

Expected outcomes for technical assistance for differentiated services delivery models include: 

● Strategic case identification and differentiated services with intensified support for the 
first 6 months on treatment for families and their C/ALHIV 
● Client centered services for mothers and HEI infants (mother-baby pairs), children and 
their families, 
● Treatment literacy for caregivers, CLHIV, and ALHIV to achieve and sustain viral 
suppression through transition to adult services 
● Collaboration and coordination with OVC case management and household support for 
C/ALHIV 


 

IR 1.3 Facilitate C/ALHIV to access comprehensive integrated services related to TB, 
nutrition, NTDs, COVID-19, and SRH. 

 

C4S is expected to facilitate C/ALHIV to access integrated health services beyond HIV, and 
where relevant outside of the facility for stable C/ALHIV. This will require defining priority 
integration services for a well child successfully managing HIV, considering how to reduce 
facility/provider stigma for C/ALHIV, and supporting C/ALHIV in a life cycle approach 


alongside their peers. Investments should seek to leverage existing efforts in screening children 
and adolescents for COVID, TB, nutrition, NTDs, SRH/family planning, and collaborate toensure effective referral systems exist beyond HIV for pediatricclients andtheir families,
especially mothers.18Innovative design, collaboration and coordination efforts are anticipated.

Illustrativeassistanceand partnerships to increase C/ALHIV access to integrated services include:

●Increased capacity to use national referral systems, tools and SOPs
●Collaboration and coordination with school health screening in high prevalence settings
●Collaboration and coordination with ministry child health/well child services and outreach
●Collaboration and coordination with youth friendly services for ALHIV
●Support pediatric HIV sites to operate in a COVID context and manage evolving 
pandemic related PEPFAR guidance,19as well as the American Rescue PlanAct (ARPA).
Objective 2:Strengthen national policies and systems to improve C/ALHIV outcomes

C4S will contribute to and leverage existing national systems and ongoing community activitiesthat support children, adolescent and family health (including OVCs) to achieve enduring HIVtreatment success. C4S will provide technical assistance on specialized pediatric health and liaise 
with ongoing GoT initiatives, as well as complementary USAID, PEPFAR, and Global Fund 
projects. C4S will facilitate relationships to leverage ongoing work supporting C/ALHIV, as wellas foster new linkages with locally led and community and faith-based organizations. Technicalassistance around this objective should network with diverse community-based systems to 
increase impact of locally available services on health outcomes for C/ALHIV.

IR 2.1 Support national HIV and TBpolicies for Children and Adolescents enhanced toachieve TB elimination and sustain epidemic control

C4S will play a critical role in bringing expertisein quality, integrated, comprehensive careforC/ALHIV to inform key policy discussions to update and improveexisting pediatric HIV and TBprevention, care and treatment in Tanzania. C4S will be expectedto actively engage in therevision and implementation of national strategies, guidance, and information from technicalmeetings. While much has been done to support the roll out and use of multiple national PMTCTand pediatricand adolescent HIV guidance,tools and training, therearecoverageand 
implementation gaps to be filled. Activities in this objective should build on past progress, 
leverage community health systems and partners, and coordinatewith implementing partner plansand budgets. C4S will advocate for the adoption of practices to reduce barriers to sustain PMTCTand pediatric treatment success.

Expected Outcomes:

●Pediatric HIV, TB, or integrated strategies, policies, guidelines and tools used and updated 
according to recognized evidenceand informed by field experience
18Measure Evaluation, 2018.https://www.measureevaluation.org/resources/publications/tr-18-
284/at_download/document

19PEPFAR Technical Guidancein the Context of COVID-19 https://www.state.gov/pepfar/coronavirus/


● Capacity of NACP and NTLP to formulate strategies, policies, guidelines and/or tools 
strengthened. 
● Facilitate direct engagement of clients/peer leaders in discussions that affect their care and 
services 


 

IR 2.2 Support linkages to social service for children and adolescent health and wellbeing, 
including OVCs 

 

C4S will play an active role in ensuring that facility and community systems align data and are 
mutually beneficial and supportive to clients as implemented. USAID Tanzania supports a large 
cohort of OVC through the Kizazi Hodari and ACHIEVE. C4S will need to ensure close 
coordination and strong collaboration with Kizazi Hodari and ACHIEVE. In areas without direct 
OVC programming, significant gaps may be identified and filled through local social service and 
development offices, as well as faith-based networks to enhance community services for 
C/ALHIV and HIV-exposed infants. 

 

Expected outcomes: 

● Improved collaboration between C4S and Kizazi Hodari and ACHIEVE through MoUs 
execution 
● Enhanced access to social-economic services and case management systems for families 
● Strengthened data sharing and monitoring outcomes for pregnant and breastfeeding 
women, HEI, and C/ALHIV that are receiving clinical and OVC program support. 


 

IR 2.3 Enhance linkages and bidirectional referral systems between projects to optimize 
resources for children and adolescents 

 

C4S will support and ensure linkages across projects and partners engaged in child and adolescent 
health and wellbeing, including OVCs. An important element of this activity will be to leverage 
existing resources, partnerships, and on-going projects to maximize project impact and reduce 
duplication of efforts or parallel workstreams. 

 

Expected outcomes: 

● Improved bi-directional referral services completion rate for A/CLHI, HEI and OVC 
● Reduced pediatric HIV treatment gap and MTCT 
● Improved access to social services among A/CLHIV, HEI, and other OVC 
● Sharing data and information between partners/projects/facilities and communities to 
achieve shared results to reduce MTCT, close the pediatric treatment gap, and sustain 
stable C/ALHIV on treatment 
● Facilitate and formalize partnerships between community networks, implementing 
partners, and GoT where appropriate 
● Orient community and faith networks in above-site technical assistance activities and 
tools, alongside MOH staff and implementing partners 


 

 

 


Objective 3: Pediatric centers of excellence model quality, comprehensive care to children 
and adolescents living with HIV 

 

C4S will provide technical assistance to two pediatric centers of excellence (COEs). The two 
COEs are co-located at Bugando Medical Center (BMC) and Mbeya Referral Hospital (MRH), 
and are operated by Baylor Tanzania, a local organization. C4S will provide support through a 
subaward to ensure these facilities have sufficient resources to provide quality, comprehensive 
care to children and adolescents living with HIV and continue to function in their capacity as 
regional training hubs. 

 

IR 3.1: Scale up comprehensive pediatric HIV care and treatment 

 

The COEs are important providers of pediatric HIV services and should continue to provide 
quality, comprehensive care to children and adolescents living with HIV currently on treatment as 
well as those newly identified. As centers of excellence, these facilities do not require technical 
assistance from C4S. Similar to Objectives 1 and 2, the COEs will be expected to: (1) implement 
pediatric HIV activities to close the treatment gap; (2) support evolving differentiated service 
delivery models that address client needs and site volume without compromising treatment 
outcomes; (3) ensure caregivers have the capacity to deliver quality comprehensive care; and (4) 
ensure children and adolescents have access to comprehensive support by successfully linking 
them with other essential services. COEs will also actively implement TB case finding activities 
in HIV negative children and adolescents. 

 

Expected Outcomes: 

● COEs continue to scale quality, comprehensive care to C/ALHIV. 
● COEs effectively link children and adolescents to other health and essential services. 


 

IR 3.2: Build the capacity of staff from select health facilities based on need/gap in pediatric 
HIV at COEs 

 

The clinical COEs will serve as training facilities for staff from other facilities to build their 
capacity, develop skills and knowledge, and view firsthand how care is delivered at the COE. C4S 
will provide support to the COEs to ensure they have resources to run training programs and will 
work with them to organize periodic training events. However, participants in these training 
programs are expected to cover the full costs of their participation. 

 

Expected Outcomes: 

● Staff from other facilities receive high quality training and mentoring in pediatric HIV and 
TB care and treatment. 


 

E. GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS 

 

The C4S project will operate in select priority regions which will include 11 USAID supported 
regions in Tanzania: Arusha, Dodoma, Iringa, Kilimanjaro, Lindi, Manyara, Morogoro, Mtwara, 
Njombe, Ruvuma, and Singida. Priority will be facilities with identified gaps in reaching children 


with HIV and TB. C4S will also support the two pediatric centers of excellence in Mbeya and 
Mwanza. 

 

F. KEY PRINCIPLES AND ASSUMPTIONS 

 

Environmental Analysis: 

 

The environmental analysis for this C4S activity is based on the current health IEE 
(https://ecd.usaid.gov/repository/pdf/54590.pdf), which was approved February 17, 2022, and 
expires January 31, 2027. This Health IEE recommends negative determination with conditions 
for activities/interventions focusing on: 

● Direct healthcare service delivery (i.e., prevention, care and treatment) focusing on 
HIV/AIDS, malaria, TB services, and family planning outreach. 
● Community Engagement Strengthening Activities. 
● Governance, policy development, and finance. 


 

In the case of C4S the implementation of its activities will include access to integrated services 
related to TB, child health including routine immunization, nutrition, NTDs, and SRH, to 
strengthen national policies and systems, scale up comprehensive pediatric care and treatment, 
and facilitate training events. These activities if not properly implemented may have a direct or 
foreseeable indirect impact on physical or social environmental health and safety. With this case, 
a negative determination with condition is recommended for all interventions under this C4S 
Activity. This implies that the implementation of C4S interventions/activities are subject to the 
specified conditions included in the Health IEE and therefore their implementation is expected to 
have no significant adverse effect on the physical and social environment. 

 

Climate Risk Analysis: 

 

The climate change risk analysis for this award relies upon the Tanzania Climate Risk 
Management (CRM) screening during the preparation of Health IEE. This CRM screening 
identifies climate-related risks to Health activities that should be addressed to enhance resilience 
and safeguard activity development objectives. This screening was conducted as part of 
implementing the Reference for ADS Chapter 201 “Climate Risks Management for USAID 
Projects and Activities”20. Based on the analysis, Tanzania is projected to experience the 
following changes in climate by mid-century: 

20 Reference to ADS Chapter 201: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200/201mal 

 

● Increase in average annual temperature of 1.4 to 2.3°C, with greater warming in the west and 
southwest 
● Increase in duration of heat waves by 7 to 22 days and dry spells by up to 7 days 
● Likely increase in average annual rainfall by -3 to +9 percent with greatest increase in 
northeast and likely decline in rainfall from July to September 
● Increase in frequency of heavy rainfall events by 7 to 40 percent, as well as an increase in 
intensity of heavy rainfall events by 2 to 11 percent 



● Increase in runoff in some river basins (Pangani, Rufiji), increasing risk of flooding and 
sedimentation; and a decrease in runoff in other basins (Wami/Ruvu), increasing water stress 
● Rise in sea level of 16 to 42 centimeters 


 

Tanzania’s health infrastructure and services are highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, 
including: 

● Increased temperatures and flooding could increase the incidence of malaria 
● Climate change could increase the spread of HIV/AIDS and TB by facilitating migration due 
to climate shocks/stressors that force people to move 
● Exposure to high temperatures is linked with higher rates of premature birth and low birth 
weight 
● Climate change impacts on agriculture (damaged crops, reduced yield) and WASH 
infrastructure (polluted water that increases incidence of waterborne diseases) could worsen 
overall health, particularly for sensitive populations like HIV/AIDS, TB, and malaria 
patients. These impacts could also place a heavier burden on the national healthcare system 
● Extreme heat and flooding could impact ability to provide technical assistance, engage with 
communities, or carry out communication and education campaigns by affecting the health of 
staff/participants, blocking access routes, or disrupting logistics networks 
● Climate change shocks and stressors may disproportionately impact women and vulnerable 
populations 


 

Climatic change can also cause decreased productivity of freshwater and coastal fisheries and 
increased severity of wildfires. Cognizant of these climate concerns, this award is determined to 
be of moderate risk. The activity’s interventions will not be severely impacted by climate change, 
but there is the possibility that an extreme climate event could affect project implementation or 
results. 

 

Gender and Women’s Empowerment 

 

Gender impacts all development outcomes for women and men; to be most effective, health 
programs must take a gender lens in all stages of programming – planning, implementation, 
monitoring, and evaluation – and at all points along the service continuum. For children and 
adolescent health programming, it is critical that risk vulnerability factors for girls and boys, and 
their parents/caregivers when designing interventions and support be considered. In Tanzania, for 
example, in most traditional households, men control decisions regarding education enrollment, 
and access to health services. Men are the primary household decision-makers and control the 
majority of household economic resources. Gender-based violence is also widespread in 
Tanzania, and it limits women and girls’ ability to negotiate access to services and disclose any 
health issue that they may be experiencing. Gender equality and women’s empowerment are 
essential for achieving the results of the C4S Activity. 

 

The Recipient will implement technical assistance and activities to reduce gender-based inequities 
in pediatric and C/ALHIV services. Resources should address the underlying reasons for gender-
based differences and use gender-sensitive approaches when designing, implementing, 
monitoring, and evaluating results. The activity will be expected to: 

 


● Provide technical assistance to balance gender inequality in service delivery — to improve 
health outcomes more equitably. 
● Pay particular attention to any potential increases in gender-based violence; and know 
referral pathways to provide adequate support to survivors. 
● Ensure that community and male engagement efforts do not compromise women’s safety 
and ability to make decisions and access services for themselves or their children. Track 
this carefully through monitoring and evaluation reports and participation. 


 

Youth Inclusion 

 

The USAID Youth in Development Policy aims to strengthen youth programming, participation, 
and partnership in support of Agency development objectives and to mainstream and integrate 
youth issues and engage young people across Agency initiatives and operations. In Tanzania, 
youth empowerment and inclusion are critical cross-cutting issues throughout the Mission’s 
CDCS results framework. The C4S response should provide quantifiable opportunities for 
adolescents in co-creation, and meaningful youth engagement and employment in 
implementation, monitoring, and advisory roles. 

 

Sustainability 

 

The Recipient must build their implementation strategy with the foundation of sustainability and 
provide a Sustainability Plan as an annex to its work plan, which will be updated annually and 
contain milestones related to institutional capacity building and the generation of financial and in-
kind resources from public and private stakeholders to complement implementation and sustain 
the gains of the activity. The Sustainability Plan might include, for example, a strategy for 
generating revenue for outreach services provided to international and local stakeholders, 
innovations such as fee-based telemedicine and virtual training, or premium care patient rooms 
for customers able to pay. The Sustainability Plan should embrace a market-based approach to 
eventual self-reliance. Ideally, the Recipient should demonstrate measurable functional and 
financial transition toward sustainability no later than the beginning of Year 4. 

 

Key Assumptions: 

 

The operating environment in Tanzania will continue to be peaceful, predictable, and 
characterized by political and economic stability. Security and operating conditions will change 
positively on the ground. Current multiparty dynamics are likely to remain in place for some time, 
with peaceful election and transition of government and power resulting in continuation of peace 
and tranquility. 

 

The Government will remain a viable and effective development partner, consistent, serve as a 
responsible partner for development, and local and non-governmental actors are willing and able 
to be more proactive development partners with the USG. 

 

The relationship with government institutions takes place within a context of openness, 
collaboration and accountability toward donors and other implementing partners. 

 


The Tanzanian economy will continue to flourish in the coming years, and be driven by continued 
currency stability, manageable inflation, stability, and increased security. 

 

The Health and Education interventions will follow the revised and approved GOT policies and 
guidelines and will play a role in improving the health outcomes of the population served. 

 

USAID’s Operating Year Budget levels for this activity will be available (based on availability of 
funding). 

 

G. MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING 

 

Monitoring: 

 

Monitoring and evaluation data will be used to inform management decisions, resource allocation 
and to assess where changes to the Activity may be required to help better ensure that the desired 
impact will be achieved. C4S will develop and track targets, output and outcome indicators, as 
well as expenditures. Measurable results at the process and outcome level are critical to achieving 
HIV epidemic control. Program indicators must align with the USAID/Tanzania Mission and 
Health Office strategic objectives and intermediate results framework, as well as with the required 
USAID and PEPFAR/Tanzania strategic objectives. Indicators must feed into the 
USAID/Tanzania’s Mission-wide Performance Management Plan (PMP) and Performance Plan 
and Report (PPR) as well as PEPFAR’s reporting process. Additionally, any data collection must 
support national approaches to strengthening the health information system and not be duplicative 
of the current data demand on health providers and administrators in clinical and community 
settings. 

 

Indicators will be appropriately disaggregated by age, sex, site, cadre, and geographical region, 
and will measure the results of the program’s strategies addressing gender. Activity Monitoring 
and Evaluation (M&E) must be consistent with USAID’s Evaluation Policy, PEPFAR’s Site 
Improvement Monitoring Systems (SIMS, see https://data.pepfar.gov/dataSources), High-
Frequency reporting (HFR) and PEPFAR MER indicators. 

 

PEPFAR Processes for Program Monitoring: 

 

As PEPFAR 3.0 evolves, the Office of the Global AIDS Coordinator (OGAC) is keenly focused 
on monitoring and achieving results. Several PEPFAR processes have been implemented to help 
PEPFAR operating units and implementing partners achieve desired results. C4S will participate 
in and contribute to all PEPFAR processes, including the ones described below. Data collection 
processes and instruments should be dynamic and flexible, ready to accommodate regular changes 
to PEPFAR guidance and requirements. 

 

1. Non-service Delivery Investments: C4S will contribute information to complete Table 6 
for OGAC, this tool tracks Above Site investments across USG to coordinate annual 
planning towards achieving and then sustaining HIV epidemic control in Tanzania. 


 


2. Community-led Monitoring (CLM): OGAC supports stakeholder feedback on the status of 
HIV service delivery in Tanzania, including critical areas such as pediatric and family 
services. This information will be shared with USG stakeholders for awareness and action. 
C4S will review feedback gathered via CLM and address issues and/or client 
recommendations as requested. 


 

3. PEPFAR Oversight and Accountability Response Team (POART): OGAC conducts 
quarterly reviews of programmatic and financial results through the POART. Data to be 
reviewed include, but are not limited to, SIMS site- and partner-level results, financial 
data (including pipeline and expenditures), and MER results. Before the calls, C4S will 
review available data with USAID staff. Following these calls, C4S will act quickly to 
address any issues or recommendations so that measurable change is made by the end of 
the next quarter. 


 

4. Expenditure Reporting: C4S will participate in the annual Tanzania-level expenditure 
reporting exercise to help PEPFAR and the USG better understand the costs that the USG 
finances to provide a broad range of HIV services and support. Data collected and 
submitted is used to improve program planning. Expenditure data is currently collected at 
the provincial level, although C4S should be prepared to move to reporting at lower levels, 
including the health zone or site, if requested. 


 

C4S will develop an Activity Monitoring, Learning and Evaluation Plan (AMELP) that reflects 
the expected results and specific outcome indicators and targets by year. Key components of the 
AMELP typically include: 

 

● The activity’s monitoring approach, including relevant performance indicators of activity 
● outputs and outcomes. 
● Any proposed internal evaluations. 
● Regular learning activities, including knowledge capture at activity close out. 
● Estimated resources for these monitoring, evaluation and learning activities that are a part 
of the implementing partner’s budget; and 
● Roles and responsibilities for all proposed monitoring, evaluation and learning actions. 


 

The AMELP will be developed in accordance with ADS 201 and USAID’s revised Evaluation 
Policy and it will underpin a coherent monitoring and evaluation system that will objectively 
assess the overall progress and impact of the activity as outlined in the program description. 

 

Evaluation: 

 

As set forth in ADS 201.3.5.13, USAID Tanzania may contract separately for an independent 
third party to conduct a final performance evaluation of this activity with the overall objective of 
generating evidence of what worked well and why, as well as what specific set of interventions 
can be considered for future USAID funding. C4S will comply with USAID requirements 
regarding evaluation planning and implementation, including selection of sites, beneficiaries, 
providing contact information and relevant documentation, collection of data, and working 
closely with USAID and the Evaluation Implementer. 


 

 

 

Collaborating, Learning & Adapting (CLA): 

 

Collaboration enables cross-sector integration, convergence, and effective interventions to 
maximize development resources and enhance development results. C4S will collaborate with 
USAID-supported activities (including those from other technical offices), other development 
partners (e.g. multilateral donors, bilateral donors, and civil society), and the Government of 
Tanzania in common areas of operation and engage with stakeholders to deliver integrated 
services to target populations. 

 

Learning should be intentional, systematic and resourced. Sources for learning include data from 
monitoring, findings of research, evaluations, analyses conducted by USAID or third parties, 
knowledge gained from experience, stocktaking exercises, and other sources. A collaborating, 
learning, and adapting focus helps to ensure that programming is coordinated, grounded in 
evidence, and adjusted as necessary to remain relevant and effective throughout implementation. 
Knowledge generated by learning must be applied throughout programming to implementation 
approaches, processes, and stakeholder engagement. Knowledge generated by learning should 
also be disseminated to activity stakeholders, partners, and collaborators in an appropriate forum 
and format so that it may be translated into decisions and actions that enhance the success of 
approaches and interventions designed to achieve common intermediate results. C4S will share 
information and knowledge generated by monitoring data, research findings, evaluations, 
analyses, and experiences with other USAID implementing partners, development partners, and 
the Government of Tanzania. C4S will also apply actionable information and knowledge gained 
from collaborating partners to activity implementation in order to improve results. 

 

C4S will adapt based on knowledge gained through learning and recognize behaviors and 
incentives necessary to create change. Knowledge gained through learning will influence decision 
making, resource allocation, and adaptation to contextual shifts. Application of new knowledge to 
implementation decisions must be reflected in the Annual Work Plan and AMELP. Decisions to 
adapt may be based on, but not limited to the following: 

 

● Extraneous changes in the operating environment (e.g. emergency or natural disaster; 
national policy changes); 
● Financial and human resource constraints. 
● Evidence that signals targets are unmet, and that the program is not achieving its goals; 
and 
● Emerging evidence that interventions are not working or could work if adapted. 


 

Any changes that will affect the scope of the activity must be approved by the Cognizant 

Agreement Officer in a modification to the award. Changes in technical approach may be 
approved by the AOR by way of the AOR’s authority to provide technical direction and approve 
Annual Work Plans. 

 

END OF SECTION A 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $13,669,994.00 million in total USAID funding over a five-year period. Below is a 
table showing the estimated amounts for C4S on annual basis: 

 

 

CategoryYear 1Year 2Year 3Year 4Year 5TotalTotal Estimated Amounts$1,741,102$2,819,195$2,923,987$3,036,152$3,149,558$13,669,994 


2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 


 

The Recipient will be required to create a MEL Plan detailing how they will ensure robust 
monitoring. To that extent, the Recipient's activity MEL plan should ensure that USAID/Tanzania 
indicators are tracked and reported on, to include relevant CDCS indicators, as identified in the 
USAID/Tanzania's PMP and Project MEL Plan, respectively. Other required indicators, such as 
standard foreign assistance indicators, to support USAID/Tanzania's annual reporting must also 
be included as part of the activity's MEL Plan. 

 

Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is five years. The estimated start date will be on or about 
February 2023, through February 2028. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

Substantial Involvement is not to exceed what is allowed in ADS 303. Examples of potential 
areas of substantial involvement during performance include, but not limited to: 

 

a. Approve Recipient’s Implementation Plan 
b. Approve Specified Key Personnel. 










 

Chief of Party (COP): 

 

The Chief of Party (COP) shall be responsible for the overall planning, implementation, 
and management of the performance of the C4S Activity and to provide vision and 
strategic leadership. The COP leads efforts to collaborate and coordinate with other 
PEPFAR and TB accelerator and USAID Tanzania projects, other donor and NGO-
sponsored activities, and the efforts of the Government of Tanzania. The COP must 
possess knowledge of and experience with the Office of Global AIDS Coordinator 
(OGAC)/PEPFAR processes and working knowledge of Country Operational Planning 
(COP) processes, PEPFAR Guidance, and PEPFAR reporting, and ability to provide 
technical guidance to PEPFAR partners in assessment, development, and implementation 
of the HIV/TB Activity’s data quality initiatives. The COP is intended to be a seasoned 


health sector professional, thoroughly familiar with the current and historic health services 
delivery sector in Tanzania, as well as with social and behavioral change approaches. 
He/she must serve as the institutional liaison and must be responsible for chief 
administrative and technical oversight of the project. The COP must work effectively in 
teams and collaborate in a multi-agency setting. The COP provides guidance to senior 
technical staff, ensures the responsiveness and quality of all work under the Activity and 
oversees the framework to monitor and assure progress toward the achievement of the 
Activity’s goals and objectives. 

Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) who will also be the technical director: 

The Deputy Chief of Party is a senior technical advisor and contributes to the strategies for 
all the technical requirements of the C4S Activity and provides technical expertise to 
ensure the fulfillment of project deliverables. The Deputy Chief of Party demonstrates an 
understanding of best practices and contributes to knowledge capture and dissemination of 
key learnings to key stakeholders and promotes innovation, improved methodologies, and 
project implementation. The DCOP actively engages with the Government of Tanzania, 
local partners, other PEPFAR partners, and development organizations and promote 
effective collaboration and cooperation across the Contractor teams. S/he will oversee all 
HIV/TB activities in facilities and communities with a focus on children. S/he will guide 
the quality of HIV/TB prevention, care and treatment provided with a focus on children. 
S/he will report directly to the COP and support the COP in providing technical direction 
to project implementation and ensure that the results are met. S/he will ensure strong 
linkages with all other project components. 

Finance and Administration Director: 

The Finance and Administration Director will be responsible for the overall financial 
management of the organization, including the accounting, invoicing, contracts 
management, procurement, and administrative activities, and ensures that adequate and 
appropriate internal controls are in place in compliance with USG and PEPFAR policies 
and procedures, to meet generally recognized accounting standards. S/he will oversee the 
effective and appropriate use of financial resources of the project; develop effective 
mechanisms to monitor the expenditures. The Finance and Administration Director has the 
responsibility to track project expenses and to prepare monthly financial reports and 
annual budget projections to ensure full compliance in accordance with USG and 
PEPFAR rules and regulations. 

Monitoring and Evaluation and learning Director: 

The MEL Director will be responsible for designing and implementing systems to ensure 
appropriate tracking and assessment of all project activities. S/he will have primary 
responsibility of reporting on project outputs and outcomes and for ensuring quality of 
interventions and establishing and managing a data processing environment responsive to 
USG reporting and learning requirements, including PEPFAR reporting expectations. The 
MEL Director will lead the development, implementation, refinement, and harmonization 
of the C4S MEL system, including developing and operationalizing indicators, setting 


targets, monitoring implementation progress, ensuring timely data collection; and 
determining and implementing a learning agenda across all the technical components of 
the agenda including a community monitoring system. 

c. Agency monitoring to permit specific kinds of direction or redirection of the work because 
of the interrelationships with other projects or activities. 










 

d. Approval of the Recipients’ MEL plan. 










 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for this activity is 935. Code 935 (any area or country including the 
recipient country but excluding any country that is a prohibited source) is the authorized USAID 
Principal Geographic Code for procurement of commodities and services. 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Tanzania Malaria 
Surveillance Activity, which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 
responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective 
administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The 
Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with 
underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is restricted per ADS 303.3.6.5.c.1(7): to restrict eligibility for a 
componence of the activity to local organizations based on the programmatic purposes. 

 

Only local organizations as defined below are eligible for award. USAID defines a “local entity” 
as an individual, a corporation, a nonprofit organization, or another body of persons that: 

 

(1) Must be incorporated or legally organized under the laws of, and have its principal place 
of business in the country served by the PEPFAR programs are implemented; or must 
exist in the region where the entity’s funded PEPFAR programs are implemented; and 
(2) Must be at 75% beneficially owned at the time of application by individuals who are 
citizens or lawfully admitted permanent residents of the same country or at least 75% of 
the entity’s staff (senior, mid-level, support) at the time of application must be citizens or 
lawfully admitted permanent residents of that same country; and 


(3) Where an entity has a Board of Directors, at least 51% of the members of the Board must 
also be citizens or lawfully admitted permanent residents of such country. 

 

For purposes of this section, ‘majority owned’ and ‘managed by’ include, without limitation, 
beneficiary interests and the power, either directly or indirectly, whether exercised or exercisable, 
to control the election, appointment, or tenure of the organization's managers or a majority of the 
organization's governing body by any means. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial assistance on the same basis as 
any other organization and are subject to the protections and requirements of Federal law. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

No cost share is anticipated under this activity. 

 

3. Unique Entity Identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) https://www.sam.gov 
and SAM.gov Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant until the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier and SAM requirements. Each applicant is required to: 

 

a) Be registered in SAM before submitting its full application. 
b) Provide a valid unique entity identifier (UEI) in its full application; and 
c) Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under 
consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 



SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Name: Dennis Foster 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email: dfoster@usaid.gov 

Mail Address: USAID/Tanzania 

686 Old Bagamoyo Road, Msasani 

P. O. Box 9130 

Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 

 

 Name: Nihal Montasser 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: nmontasser@usaid.gov 

 

Name: Catherine Ryoba 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: cryoba@usaid.gov 

Mail Address: USAID/Tanzania 

686 Old Bagamoyo Road, Msasani 

P. O. Box 9130 

Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted usaidtzco@usaid.gov no later than the date 
and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective 
applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants as 
an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the 
lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted electronically in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) 
Application. This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full 
application. Please see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the 
Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical 
aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and 
other related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

• Name of the organization(s) submitting the application. 



• Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
• Program name 
• Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
• Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the title page with the 
following legend: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed outside the U.S. 
government and must not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – 
for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is 
awarded to this Applicant as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of 
this data, the U.S. government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the 
data to the extent provided in the resulting grant. This restriction does not limit the 
U.S. government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained 
from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers} and, mark each sheet of data it wishes to 
restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of 

this application” 

 

Applicants should retain for their records a copy of the application and all annexes attached to it. 

 

a. Application Format 


 

All applications must comply with the following requirements to be considered by USAID: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 



● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 
12-point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should 
retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

b. Application Content 


 

The technical application must contain the following sections: 

 

i. Table of Contents listing all page numbers and attachments 
ii. List of Acronyms used throughout the application 
iii. Technical Approach Narrative describing the project’s technical approach and 
expected accomplishments during the period of the proposed Cooperative 
Agreement. 
iv. Annexes - Should be numbered separately as “Annex A, Annex B”, et cetera. 


 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and 
received on time. 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of 
delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 

Sample Language for email submission: 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to usaidtzco@usaid.gov. Email submissions must 
include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an 
application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to 


the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments 
(e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first 
email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost 
Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same 
email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" 
email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Tanzania cannot guarantee 
their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 20MB limit per email 
compatible with MS Word, Excel and PDF. Each email must not include more than three 
attachments which in total must not add up to more than 20MB limit per email. 

 

5. Technical Applications Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this activity. The application should take into account the requirements of the activity and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

The technical application must include the following, in the order presented below: 

i. Cover Sheet: Cover page (1 page) must contain the following information: 
• Name of the organization(s) submitting the application. 
• Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address). Of persons who prepared the 
application, and corresponding signatures 
• Activity name 



• Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
• Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303). 
• The Tax Identification Number (TIN) and 
• Unique Entity Identification number (UEI) numbers of the Prime Applicant and 
any proposed sub-applicants. 


 

ii. Table of Contents Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference 
and identify merit review criteria. 


 

iii. Executive Summary (Two pages): 


The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the 
Technical Application. 

iv. Technical Approach (Twenty-Five pages): Applicants must: 


 

Submit a narrative of no more than 25 pages that describes the technical approach to 
achieving the objectives/expected results outlined in the activity description and 
subsequently as discussed during the co-creation workshop. The narrative must address 
the following: 

● Strategies and plans to ensure health facilities in priority areas provide high quality 
integrated pediatric HIV services and that children and adolescents are able to access 
comprehensive health and other services. 
● Describe how they will provide technical assistance to end mother-to-child-
transmission of HIV (eMTCT 
● ) by supporting pregnant and breastfeeding women (PBFW) and their HIV-exposed 
infants (HEI), close the HIV treatment gap for children and adolescents living with 
HIV (C/ALHIV) and drive TB elimination and well-being for C/ALHIV in Tanzania. 
● Demonstrate how the activity will ensure the continued delivery of HIV services for 
PBFW, HIV Exposed Infants (HEI), and C/ALHIV at two pediatric centers of 
excellence (COE) and support these COEs to serve as hubs for service delivery and 
clinical capacity building. 
● Engage with GOT (President's Office, Regional Administration (PORALG) and 
Ministry of Health) and build sustainability from the start of the program. 


As Annex A (not included in the 25-page Technical Approach page count), applicants 
must submit no more than a 10-page Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) plan 
describing how data will be used to monitor progress, identify lessons learned, guide 
corrective actions, and capture and leverage emerging evidence to continuously improve 
activity performance. 

 


As Annex B (not included in the 25-page Technical Approach page count), applicants 
must submit no more than a 5-page draft of the first year Work Plan. The Draft Year One 
Workplan, which must be attached to the Technical Proposal, will illustrate in detail the 
Offeror’s proposed activities and their planned timing and sequence, including milestones 
and proposed incremental targets for Year 1. 

 

v. Management and Staffing Plan, including Key Personnel: 


Applicants must submit a four-page Management and Staffing Plan that includes the 
following: 

 

A clear description of the distinctive roles and responsibilities of the prime and sub-
partners and how they will contribute to achieving the objectives/expected results. The 
plan must include an overview of how activities and communication will be managed and 
coordinated between the prime and sub-recipients. 

 

A clear description of roles and responsibilities of the prime’s headquarters and office(s) 
in Tanzania showing the division or responsibilities between in-country project staff, and 
home office support (if applicable). 

 

Approach to staffing and recruitment. 

 

Position descriptions for positions applicants deem critical and professional summaries for 
each known critical staff member. 

 

 Description of how adaptive management will be expressed through staffing skills, 
management structure, project organizational culture, business processes, and stakeholder 
engagement throughout project implementation. 

 

The Applicant must propose the staffing with the right skill mix required to accomplish the 
components and results for each activity. USAID has specified three positions as Key Personnel, 
including a Chief of Party, Technical Director (also Deputy Chief of Party) and Finance and 
Administration Director and Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning Director. The Applicant 
must, at a minimum, propose a candidate for each of these positions. Proposed candidates must 
meet the minimum requirements for the positions for which they are proposed. Description of 
how adaptive management will be expressed through staffing skills, management 
structure, project organizational culture, business processes, and stakeholder engagement 
throughout project implementation. 

 

Annex C must provide an organizational chart with an overview of the structure of the 
proposed team, including proposed positions, any proposed subcontractors, and the 
reporting lines and major areas of responsibility. An organizational chart clearly 
describing lines of reporting and decision making between the prime, sub-partners, 
headquarter, and office(s) in Tanzania, in addition to proposed key and non-key positions. 

 

Annex D must contain CVs for each proposed Key Personnel candidate. Each CV must 
be in a standardized format that explicitly demonstrates how each candidate meets each of 
the specific requirements for the position for which s/he is proposed. The CV must 


include contact information for at least three recent professional references, which USAID 

 

Annex E must include Letters of Commitment, each must be signed by the individuals 
proposed as Key Personnel, confirming his/her present intention to serve in the stated 
position, and his/her present availability to serve for the term of the proposed project. 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 














 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 















 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 


 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B). 


 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year. Files must not 
contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost 
analysis time required to make an award and may result in a rejection of the cost application. 
The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed 
costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements 
identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, 
including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and 
reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

(i) Personnel 


(ii) Fringe Benefits 

(iii) Consultants 

(iv) Travel, Transportation, and Per Diem 

(v) Equipment 

(vi) Supplies 

(vii) Contractual and Sub-awards 

(viii) Participant Training 

(ix) Other Direct Costs 

(x) Indirect Costs 

The budget must include costs to ensure appropriate coordination, collaboration and information 
sharing with other USAID, U.S. Government Agencies, other international donors and the GOT. 

Description of the cost elements are provided below: 


Personnel: Direct salary and wages should be proposed in accordance with the applicant’s 
personnel policies and meet the regulatory requirements. Costs of long-term and short-term 
personnel should be broken down by person years, months, days or hours. 

Fringe Benefits: Allowances and services provided by the applicant to its employees as 
compensation in addition to regular wages and salaries are allowable. A detailed cost breakdown 
by benefit types should be provided. 

 Consultants: Services rendered by persons who are members of a particular profession or 
possess a special skill and who are not officers or employees of the applicant are allowable costs. 
Costs of consultants should be broken down by person years, months, days or hours. 

Travel, Transportation, and Per Diem: Cost principles in 2 CFR 200, Subpart E provide for 
costs for transportation, lodging, meals and incidental expenses. Costs should be broken down by 
the number of trips, domestic and international, cost per trip, per diem and other related travel 
costs. 

Equipment: Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models and the cost per 
unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and the basis 
for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and 
reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market 
conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of 
the property leased. 

Supplies: Must include information on estimated types of Supplies and the cost per unit and 
quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the supplies and the basis for the 
estimates. 

Contractual and Sub-awards: Per 2 CFR 200.92, a Subaward means an award provided by a 
pass-through entity to a subrecipient for the subrecipient to carry out part of a Federal award 
received by the pass-through entity. It does not include payments to a contractor or payments to 
an individual that is a beneficiary of a Federal program. A subaward may be provided through any 
form of legal agreement, including an agreement that the pass-through entity considers a contract. 
A breakdown of all costs associated with the program according to the costs of, if applicable, 
headquarters, regional and/or country offices. Applicants who intend to utilize contractors or sub-
recipients should indicate the extent intended and provide a complete cost breakdown. Extensive 
contracts/agreement financial plans should follow the same cost format as submitted by the 
primary Applicant. A breakdown of all costs according to each partner organization, contract or 
sub/awardee involved in the program should be provided. 

Pursuant to 2 CFR 200 Contract means a legal instrument by which the Applicant purchases 
property or services needed to carry out the project or program under a resulting award. The term 
does not include a legal instrument when the substance of the transaction meets the definition of a 
Federal award or sub-award (see § 200.92 Sub-award), even if the Applicant considers it a 
contract. 

The Applicant must describe the work to be performed, the risk borne by the contractor, the 
contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, the quality of its record of past 


performance, and industry profit rates in the surrounding geographical area for similar work. All 
vehicles need to be purchased by the prime recipient. 

Individual sub-awards with a value equal to more than $500,000 proposed as part of application 
must include the same cost element breakdowns in their budget as applicable. 

Participant Training: ADS 253 provides for participant training and training in development. 
Costs should be broken down by types and participants. 

Other Direct Costs: This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 
miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant 
should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and 
their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the 
narrative should be minimal. 

Applicants must submit a budget that responds to the proposed technical approach and is flexible 
enough to accommodate opportunities that are likely to emerge but cannot be described with 
specificity once a year during the annual implementation planning process. The proposed budget 
must account for these types of activities in accordance with 2 CFR 200.433. 

Allowances: Allowances should be broken down by specific type and by person and should be in 
accordance with applicant’s policies and generally aligned with the Department of State Standard 
Regulations (DSSR). 

Indirect Costs: The Applicant must submit a Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement NICRA if 
the organization has such an agreement with an agency or department of the U.S. Government. If 
no NICRA exists, the Applicant should submit one of the following: 

Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public Account (CPA) 
documenting the review of the financial statements was performed in accordance with Statements 
on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; that management is responsible for the 
preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable 
financial reporting framework and for designing, implementing and maintaining internal control 
relevant to the preparation. The account must also state that he or she is not aware of any material 
modifications that should be made to the financial statements; or 

 Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issues a report documenting the audit was 
conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the financial 
statements are the responsibility of management, provides an opinion that the financial statements 
present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the company and the results of 
operations are in conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework (or issues a 
qualified opinion if the financial statements are not in conformity with the applicable financial 
reporting framework. 

If the applicant has never received a negotiated indirect cost rate, the applicant may choose to 
charge a de minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (see 2 CFR 200.414(f)). If the 
prospective applicant chooses the de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer must incorporate the 


10% indirect cost rate in the award budget and the recipient must follow the requirements in 2 
CFR 200.414(f). 

Note: Costs for developing the EMMP and environmental compliance implementation and 
monitoring should be reflected in the cost application. USAID wants to ensure that applicants 
include costs associated with environmental compliance activities in all applicable categories. 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• Unique Entity Identifier (UEI)Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the 
Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) SAM and UEI Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (UEI)and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal 
awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid UEI number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients, 
2. Must be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining 
processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating 
hosting to make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
https://www.sam.gov 



3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID receives the applicants’ application, USAID may determine that the applicant is 
not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to 
another applicant. 

 

Unique Entity Identifier: https://sam.gov/content/home 

 

SAM registration: https://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on https://www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

Requirement for Unique Entity Identifier. If you are authorized to make subawards under this 
Federal award, you: (1) Must notify potential subrecipients that no entity (see definition in 
paragraph c. of this award term) may receive a subaward from you until the entity has provided its 
Unique Entity Identifier to you. (2) May not make a subaward to an entity unless the entity has 
provided its Unique Entity Identifier to you. Subrecipients are not required to obtain an active 
SAM registration but must obtain a Unique Entity Identifier. 

g. History of Performance 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed five (5), as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization 
• Award Number 
• Activity Title 
• A brief description of the activity 
• Period of Performance 
• Award Amount 
• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3); and 
• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed 
the work at the organization for which the service was performed with complete 
current contact information including telephone number, and e-mail address for 
each proposed individual. 


 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information 


concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such 
information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional 
information and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the 
risk assessment. 

 

h. Branding and Marking Plan 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any 
resulting award. 

i. Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

Sub Criteria 

 CRITERION NAME 

Criterion 1 

Technical Approach 

Criterion 2 

Management and Staffing Approach 

Sub criteria 2.1 

Key Personnel 

Criterion 3 

Institutional Capacity 



 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

USAID/Tanzania will screen all applications received for completeness and compliance with 
instructions for submission. The Agreement Officer will then forward those applications that are 
complete and comply with instructions to a Selection Committee (SC). The SC will then conduct 
a merit review of each application. Following the merit review of the applications, a letter will be 
sent to all applicants detailing the outcome of the review. The SC will review applications based 
upon the merit review criteria set forth below which are tailored to this NOFO. 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following 
criteria shown in descending order of importance for criteria 1, 2, and 3 and of equal importance 
for sub-criteria 2.1. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #1: Technical Approach 

Applicants must submit a narrative of no more than 25 pages that describes the technical approach 
to achieving the objectives/expected results outlined in the program description. The narrative 
must address the following: 

● Strategies and plans to ensure health facilities in priority areas provide high quality 
integrated pediatric HIV services and that children and adolescents are able to access 
comprehensive health and other services. 



● Describe how they will provide technical assistance to end mother-to-child-transmission 
of HIV (eMTCT) by supporting pregnant and breastfeeding women (PBFW) and their 
HIV-exposed infants (HEI), close the HIV treatment gap for children and adolescents 
living with HIV (C/ALHIV) and drive TB elimination and well-being for C/ALHIV in 
Tanzania. 
● Demonstrate how the activity will ensure the continued delivery of HIV services for 
PBFW, HIV Exposed Infants (HEI), and C/ALHIV at two pediatric centers of excellence 
(COE) and support these COEs to serve as hubs for service delivery and clinical capacity 
building. 
● Engage with GOT (President's Office, Regional Administration (PORALG) and Ministry 
of Health) and build sustainability from the start of the program. 


As Annex A (not included in the 25-page Technical Approach page count), applicants must 
submit no more than a 10-page Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) plan describing how 
data will be used to monitor progress, identify lessons learned, guide corrective actions, and 
capture and leverage emerging evidence to continuously improve activity performance. 

 

As Annex B (not included in the 25-page Technical Approach page count), applicants must 
submit no more than a 5-page draft of the first year Work Plan. 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the technical approach provides a technically 
sound, realistic and contextually appropriate approach to achieve the overall target and successfully 
implement the work described in Section A, Program Description" Moreover, applicants will be 
evaluated on the strength of the collaboration and linkages with OVC partners, including 
participation National Technical Working Groups (TWG). 

The applicant’s technical approach should be evidence-based, gender-sensitive, children and 
PBFW focus and logically sequenced to achieve the results in the regions that the applicant will 
prioritize. It should demonstrate technical expertise in Pediatric HIV, PMTCT, HEID, TB in 
areas where there is huge HIV treatment gap, high TB burden, ability to provide both clinical 
services and technical assistance and the use of data to plan, prioritize and implement targeted 
interventions. The activity will need to be ambitious but have realistic targets for indicators to 
support results; define learning activities, including an agenda that will enhance project activities 
to effectively and efficiently achieve objectives and results. It should also demonstrate activities 
that will build long term sustainability with achievable milestones from the start of the program 
that will lead to institutionalization of the program and builds on national AIDS and TB control 
programs and reflects a collaborative approach to working with the Government of Tanzania. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #2: Management and Staffing Approach 

Applicants must submit a two-page Management and Staffing Plan that includes the following: 

A clear description of the distinctive roles and responsibilities of the prime and sub-partners and 
how they will contribute to achieving the objectives/expected results. The plan must include an 


overview of how activities will be managed and coordinated between the prime and sub-
recipients. 

A clear description of roles and responsibilities of the prime’s headquarters and office(s) in 
Tanzania showing the division or responsibilities between in-country project staff, and home 
office support (if applicable). 

 

Approach to staffing and recruitment. 

 

Position descriptions for positions applicants deem critical and professional summaries for each 
known critical staff member. 

 

Description of how adaptive management will be expressed through staffing skills, management 
structure, project organizational culture, business processes, and stakeholder engagement 
throughout project implementation. 

 

As Annex C, an organizational chart clearly describing lines of reporting and decision making 
between the prime, sub-partners, headquarter, and office (s) in Tanzania, in addition to proposed 
key and non-key positions. 

 

The application will be evaluated on the extent to which the Management and Staffing Plan, 
including institutional partners, can successfully carry out the activity’s objectives, achieve 
expected results, and effectively manage and implement activities. Moreover, the plan will be 
evaluated to the extent to which it: 

 

• Shows a management structure consistent with the program approach and geographic scope. 

• Demonstrates the applicant’s ability to provide appropriate technical resources and expertise to 
realistically and efficiently meet the activity’s technical, coordination, communications and 
collaborating, learning and adapting (CLA) needs. 

• Has the right number of people and complement of technical and administrative skills to 
effectively manage the activity towards achievement of results as outlined in the program 
description. 

• Proposes a personnel composition that achieves gender equity. 

 

Sub-Criteria: Key Personnel: 

 

The Key Personnel will be evaluated on the extent to which: 

 

The quality and experience of the proposed combination of key personnel (1) possesses the 
minimum knowledge, skills, expertise, and experience outlined below and (2) the past 
performance references collected by USAID strongly support the candidate’s ability to 
successfully accomplish the requirements of the position. 

 

Minimum Requirements: 

 

Chief of Party (COP) 

• Master’s degree in Public Health or social science is required. 



• Ten years of senior level management experience in the design, implementation, and 
management of programs of similar size, complexity, and setting. 
• Demonstrated experience in expertise in Pediatric HIV, Adolescent Health Prevention of 
Mother to Child transmission of HIV, linkages with OVC, Nutrition, Family planning 
institutional strengthening approaches. 
• Demonstrated leadership skills and experience in building and maintaining productive 
working relationships with colleagues and host government. 
• Proven record of building teams and fostering collaboration to achieve program goals, 
meet program milestones, and produce quality program results. 
• Demonstrated knowledge of Tanzania national issues impacting HIV, TB and Nutrition, 
including demonstrated success collaborating with NACP and NTLP, and local 
government institutions. 
• Knowledge of U.S. Government health initiatives and related reporting requirements and 
funding parameters. 
• Fluent in Swahili – Level four preferred. 
• Demonstrated skills in both English written and oral communication. 
• Experience working with the health sector in Tanzania is preferred. 


 

The Deputy Chief of Party must possess at least: 

• A Master’s Degree in public health or a medical degree. 
• 10 years of experience designing, implementing and managing HIV/TB projects of similar 
scope and size with experience in Tanzania highly desirable. 
• Demonstrated experience in managing programs that address the needs of communities in 
Tanzania with the aim of preventing new HIV and TB infections and providing quality 
care and treatment to those infected, resulting in viral suppression. 
• Demonstrated experience in expertise in Pediatric HIV, Adolescent Health Prevention of 
Mother to Child transmission of HIV, linkages with OVC, Nutrition, Family planning 
institutional strengthening approaches. 
• Demonstrated skills in project reporting, preferably for PEPFAR funded programs 
• Demonstrated experience in program financial oversight including sub grant management. 
• Familiarity with Tanzania’s institutional, policy and programming context for pediatric 
HIV/TB 


 

Finance and Administration Director 

• Certified Public Accountant is required. 
• Demonstrated experience in managing and supervising a team. 
• At minimum seven years’ experience in financial management of U.S. assistance 
programs of similar size, complexity and setting. 
• Expertise in U.S. Government cost principles, rules and regulations and applying these 
in program decision-making. 
• Demonstrated experience in supporting and working with program technical staff to 
ensure resources are used efficiently and to accurately account for expenditures. 
• Demonstrated experience in managing sub-grants including risk assessment and 
working with host government entities as grantees. 



• Ability to communicate effectively in English and Swahili, both verbally and in 
writing. 
• Demonstrated computer skills, particularly in Microsoft Excel, and experience using 
commercially available accounting software programs. 
• Excellent record of accurate and on-time reporting to donor agencies. 


 

The MEL Director must possess at least: 

• A Master’s degree or higher in public health evaluation, public health, epidemiology, 
statistics, demography or related field. 
• At least 8 years of experience in monitoring and evaluation of pediatric HIV/TB programs 
of similar scope and size, preferably in a PEPFAR funded program. 
• Demonstrated experience in developing and managing data collection systems, with 
experience in Tanzania at community and facility level. 
• Ability to develop and implement quality assurance systems. 
• Familiarity with Government of Tanzania’s national HIV and TB prevention, care and 
support policies and plans. 
• Demonstrated ability to take advantage of new technologies to strengthen MEL 


 

b) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

The award made through this NOFO will be administered by USAID/Tanzania. 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The AO is the only individual who 
may legally commit the U.S. government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable 
to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed Agreement 
or a specific, written authorization from the AO. 

 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

Non-US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex #2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

3. Requirements for Plans and Reports 

 

The Recipient must adhere to all reporting requirements listed below. All plans and reports must 
be submitted in English. Documents must be submitted electronically by email. All reports must 
be submitted by the due date for review by the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative 
(AOR) designated by the Agreement Officer. The Agreement Officer and designated Acquisition 
& Assistance Specialist must be copied on each submission. The Recipient will consult the AOR 
on the format and expected content of reports prior to submission. 

 

Plans 

 

Annual Implementation Plan - Within 60 calendar days of the effective date of the award, the 
Recipient will submit the first annual work plan to cover the period of time from the effective date 
of the Cooperative Agreement to August 4, 2023. Subsequent implementation plans will cover the 
period August 5 to August 4 of the following year and must be submitted by August 30 of each 
year. Plans may be revised with AOR written approval on an as needed basis to reflect unforeseen 
adjustments in implementation. The AOR will review the implementation plan and provide 
written comments within 15 calendar days to the Recipient and the Recipient shall finalize the 
plan no later than 15 calendar days after receipt of the AOR’s written comments. 

 


 

Presentation of Annual Work Plan: In addition to the submission of the electronic copy of the 
annual work plans described above, the Recipient must present the plan to the AOR and other 
interested USAID staff on an annual basis. This presentation will be held in or around October of 
each year and organized in collaboration with the AOR. 

 

The Implementation Plan will outline: 

• Key activities, proposed accomplishments and expected progress towards 
achieving planned results and performance targets tied to the MEL Plan. 
• Timeline for implementation of the year’s proposed activities, including target 
completion dates. 
• Information on how activities will be implemented and supervised. 
• Personnel requirements to achieve expected outcomes. 
• Major commodities and equipment to be procured when applicable. 
• Details of collaboration with other major partners and other USAID/USG projects 
• Planned short-term and long-term technical assistance (STTA/LTTA) 
• Detailed budget to allow appropriate evaluation of the implementation plan. The 
budget should delineate an overall budget by line item. 
• As an annex, Activity Fact Sheets 
• As an annex, prepare an Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) 
describing how the Recipient will, in specific terms, implement all IEE conditions 
that apply to proposed activity interventions. The EMMP shall include monitoring 
the implementation of the conditions and their effectiveness, making any necessary 
adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts to the 
environment. (An EMMP conforming to these requirements is hereinafter termed a 
“complete EMMP.”) 
• As an annex to the annual Implementation Plan, the Recipient must include a 
sustainability plan that describes its approach to building the capacity of host 
government entities to continue interventions beyond the end of this activity. The 
plan must outline any resource leveraging from non-U.S. government sources and 
describe linkages to the achievement of the NOFO objectives. The plan must 
include a set of realistic benchmarks and indicators that qualify the increasing 
sustainability of these approaches and measure the attainment of activity results. 
The plan must outline a clear phase-out exist strategy and timeline of execution, 
including a description of the methodology it will use in determining areas and 
levels of sustainability. 


 

Monitoring, Evaluation & Learning (MEL) Plan: Within 90 days of the start of the award, the 
Recipient will be required to submit a final MEL to the USAID AOR for approval. The MEL plan 
shall cover the full period of the Cooperative Agreement and shall include, but not necessarily be 
limited to, the following: 

• Description of how the recipient will monitor program interventions, measure results 
ensure data quality, and use data to inform on-going activities. 





• Description of how data will be collected, stored and analyzed. The indicators to be 
used to measure achievement of the results. The method of data collection to be used 
to obtain the indicator data. 
• A Learning Plan, which will establish a learning agenda (including program 
questions and evidence gaps); detail plans for conducting implementation science 
activities; describe how program evidence will be utilized to inform other public 
health partners and stakeholders (i.e. implementing partners, GOT, technical forums) 




 

To that extent, the Recipient’s activity MEL plan should ensure that UDAID/Tanzania indicators 
are tracked and reported on, to include relevant CDCS and other Project indicators, as identified 
in the USAID/Tanzania’s PMP and Project MEL Plan, respectively. Other required indicators, 
such as standard foreign assistance indicators, to support USAID/Tanzania’s annual reporting 
must also be included as part of the activity’s MEL Plan. 

 

All data related to beneficiaries must be sex-disaggregated by male (M)/female (F)/total. 

 

The indicators for reporting should include, but are not limited to, the following: 

 

1. HTS_TST: Number of individuals who received HIV Testing Services (HTS) and 
received their test results 

2. TX_NEW: Number of adults and children newly enrolled on antiretroviral therapy (ART 

3. TX_CURR: Number of adults and children currently receiving antiretroviral therapy 
(ART) 

4. TX_RET: Percentage of adults and children known to be on treatment 12 months after 
initiation of antiretroviral therapy 

5. TX_PVLS: Percentage of ART patients with a viral load result documented in the medical 
record and/or laboratory information systems (LIS) within the past 12 months with a 
suppressed viral load (<1000 copies/ml) 

6. TB_PREV: The number of ART patients who completed a standard course of TB 
preventive therapy within the semi-annual reporting period 

7. TX_TB: The proportion of ART patients screened for TB in the semi-annual reporting 
period who are receiving TB treatment. 

8. INTEG_SERV: Percentage of health facilities providing a minimum package of integrated 
family centered pediatric and adolescent health services (FP, TB, NACS, Bidirectional 
linkage to CBO, FCC) in the reporting period 

9. ACTIVE_QIT: Percentage of HF’s with active QI team implementing Program to increase 
case finding linkage and retention into care 

10. HF_ADO_PSY: Percentage of facilities established and maintaining adolescent 
psychosocial services 

11. HCWs_TRAIN: Number of HCWs trained in different technical skills 

12. MENT_VISIT: Number of mentorship visits conducted 

13. HCW_MENTD: Number of HCWs mentored in different technical skills 

14. TECH_SUPPORT: Number of reviews of national guidelines, SOPs, job aids that were 
supported by C4S technical team 

 


USAID/Tanzania will review the draft MEL plan and provide written comments/suggestions to 
the Recipient and the Recipient shall finalize the plan no later than 15 days from receipt of 
USAID/Tanzania’s comments/suggestions. 

Close-out/Demobilization Plan 

 

Six months prior to the completion date of the Cooperative Agreement, a close-
out/demobilization plan, including the proposed disposition of equipment, such as vehicles, will 
be submitted to the USAID Agreement Officer for approval, with a copy to the AOR. The close-
out plan shall include a list of actions that are typically required for close-out activities to ensure 
that all project activities are completed; conduct an analysis of progress to date and, if necessary, 
expedite timelines to ensure completion; conduct a thorough pipeline analysis to ensure that there 
are sufficient funds available to finalize activities and complete all requirements; ensure that all 
reports are submitted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement. All 
subcontracts and/or sub-awards should be completed, and payments settled, if applicable. 

 

Submit a final inventory of all residual non-expendable property that was acquired or furnished 
by the U.S. Government under the Cooperative Agreement and request disposition instructions 
for any property acquired or furnished by the Government under the program. Ensure that all staff 
members are provided with severance and other payments, if applicable, in accordance with local 
labor law. Ensure that all audit requirements are addressed, if applicable. For U.S. organizations, 
demobilization plans need to include closing of offices (including cancelation of phone, 
electricity, subscriptions, etc.), disposition of all equipment (including vehicles), disposition of 
residual supplies, repatriation of expatriate staff, household and POV shipments, etc. 

 

The types and frequency of financial and programmatic reports must be strictly limited to those 
detailed in 2 CFR 200. 

 

Reports 

 

Financial Reporting – In accordance with 2 CFR 200.327, the SF 425 must be submitted on a 
quarterly basis. The recipient must submit these forms in the following manner: 

 

Quarterly Financial Report: The Recipient will report on the SF-425 Federal Financial Reporting form 
available at Federal Financial Report | GSA . The Recipient will send the completed SF-425 by e-mail 
to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and copy the Agreement Officer (AO) and 
the USAID/Tanzania Office of Financial Management (OFM) at accountspayabletz@usaid.gov, within 
30 calendar days following the end of each USAID quarter. 

 

If the Recipient has a Letter of Credit with the US government, then, a copy of the “Final” 
Federal Financial Report (FFR/SF-425) report for this award is to be submitted to the USAID 
LOC Team at locfinalreport@usaid.gov. 

 

Reports are due as noted below: 

 

Reporting Quarter SF-425 Due Date 

 


Reporting Quarter SF-425 Due Date 

October 1 – December 31 January 31 

January 31 – March 30 April 30 

April 1 – June 31 July 30 

June 1 – September 30 October 30 

 

The financial reporting form includes the following information: 

• Cash receipts, disbursements, and fund balance 
• Expenditures and unobligated balance 
• Recipient share, amount expended, and balance 
• Amount of activity income earned, expended, and balance 


 

The Recipient will submit the Final Financial Report within 90 days after the end of the activity. 

 

Reporting on Foreign Taxes: The Recipient must comply with the Standard Provision set forth in 
Attachment C of the Cooperative Agreement entitled “Reporting Host Country Government Taxes (June 
2012)”. 

 

Performance Reporting - The Recipient must submit quarterly performance reports 30 calendar 
days after the end of the reporting period (F). These reports should (January 31 – April 30, July 31 
and October 30) activities undertaken, alliances established during the quarter, report on progress 
made toward achieving results, and any necessary adjustment of activities and timelines that will be 
undertaken in the following quarter. 

 

Quarterly Performance Reports must include the following: 

• Progress on major activities during the period. 
• Any implementation problems and proposed remedial actions as appropriate. 
• Planned activities for each expected result for the next quarter. 
• Gender considerations in implementation and performance during the quarter. 
• Environmental Compliance - Provide brief description of review all ongoing and planned 
activities under the Cooperative Agreement to determine if they are within the scope of 
the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 
• Success stories 
• Progress on performance indicators in the MEL Plan. 
• Description of efforts to ensure coordination, collaboration, and information sharing 
during the reporting period and any problems encountered, agreements reached, and/or 
actions taken to ensure coordination between partners. 
• Other pertinent information, including a statement of accrued expenditures, analysis or 
explanation of cost overruns or underruns. 
• List of all documentation submitted to the Development Experience Clearinghouse 
(DEC); 
• A certification that all training events have been entered in the TraiNet database; and 
• As an annex, at least one success story with information on the project’s outcomes, results, 
and/or impact during the reporting period, beginning with the third quarterly reporting 
period. 



• List of upcoming events with dates (e.g. program launch, data dissemination, high-level 
site visit) particularly those in which the recipient requires USAID Tanzania participation. 
• PMI Reporting – The Recipient will report against designated PMI indicators in the 
automated PMI database as instructed by USAID/Tanzania. 
• USAID Tanzania reporting in the USAID Development Information Solution (DIS). 


 

Annual Reports – The fourth quarterly report will be replaced by the Annual Performance 
Report and due on February 15 of each year. The Recipient will report annually through the 
USAID/Tanzania Monitoring and Evaluation Management Service on appropriate, standard 
CDCS project indicators, and selected PPR indicators. In addition, the annual reports will 
include: 

• Extent to which objectives and results in the Annual Work Plan were achieved. 
• Highlights of major achievements during the year. 
• Significant implementation problems and challenges encountered during the year and 
mitigation measures taken to address these (if applicable). 
• Description of efforts and progress achieved in applying and incorporating CLA, 
promotion of equity, sustainability of successful approaches. 
• Description of efforts to ensure coordination, collaboration, and information sharing 
during the reporting period and any problems encountered, agreements reached, and/or 
actions taken to ensure coordination with relevant stakeholders. 
• Description of efforts and progress achieved with activities to advance gender 
equality. 
• Update on the implementation of the Sustainability Plan, including description of 
efforts and progress achieved with regards to sustainability of project activities. 
• Progress achieved with regard to MEL Plan indicators and targets for the fourth 
quarter and entire fiscal year. If proposing changes to future year targets, include the 
new targets and justification for these changes. 
• Updates on analysis related to project evaluation questions and the learning agenda in 
the MEL Plan. 
• Lessons learned, observations, and recommendations that might be relevant to the 
design and implementation of other related activities 
• Environmental compliance information, as applicable; and 
• Development of manuscript and submission to publication journal 
• Success stories for publication. 


 

Final Performance Report - A Final Performance Report is required within 90 days of the 
expiration of the Cooperative Agreement. The Final Performance Report should include the 
following: 

• An Executive Summary describing the project, overall accomplishments, lessons learned, 
and conclusions about future assistance needs. 

• Overall description of the project and activities implemented. 

• Description of overall achievements and results during the life of the project. 

• Assessment of progress made in achieving the project’s goal, objectives, and expected 
results. 

• Any shortcomings or difficulties encountered, and reasons why expected results were not 


met, if applicable. 

• Summary of MEL Plan indicator results and an assessment of indicators’ relative 
usefulness in tracking project progress. 

• Summary of key findings from internal evaluations and assessments. 

• Summary of learning activities, including progress made in responding to key research 
questions around critical knowledge gaps in the learning agenda. 

• Changes in the project environment over the course of implementation. 

• Changes in project design and implementation, as well as summary of adaptive 
management approaches applied. 

• Summary of lessons learned. 

• Recommendations regarding unfinished work, if applicable; and 

• Recommendations relevant to future project design and implementation. 

 

The Final Performance Report must also include a list of all reports, publications, evaluations, and 
information and media products produced under this agreement, as well as confirmation that all 
products were submitted to the USAID Developmental Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 

 

4. Program Income 


 

If there will be program income generated under the award, the AO must consider how that 
income will be treated under the award. Any program income generated under the award will be 
added to USAID funding and used for program purposes. 

 

5. Environmental Compliance 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 

USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include 

environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 

development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and 

in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 

(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), which, in part, require that the potential 

environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision 

to proceed and those appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 

Applicant’s environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures 

are specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

In addition, the applicant must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 

otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and 

USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under a resulting grant will be implemented unless environmental 

threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as 

documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 

Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau 

Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved 


Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

 

In case of a successful application, the applicant will work with USAID staff to determine 

any environmental compliance requirements, implementation procedures, and reporting 

requirements on the compliance activities/results. 

 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient in 

collaboration with the USAID Cognizant Technical Officer and Mission Environmental 

Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and 

planned activities under the resultant grant is to determine if they are within the scope of 

the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 

 

If the successful recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved 

Regulation 216 environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the 

documentation for USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken 

prior to receiving written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 

environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 

submitted and written approval. 

 

6. Other Requirements 


 

Gender Consideration 

 

Promoting gender equality and advancing the status of all women and girls around the 

world is vital to achieving U.S. foreign policy and development objectives. As part of the 

design of any proposed activity, the Recipient will assess and identify gender issues which 

impact the participation of men and women equally in the participation of this activity. 

Refer to USAID ADS 205 found at for more information on integrating this policy into the 
applicant’s approach. 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

Name: Dennis Foster 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email: dfoster@usaid.gov 

Mail Address: USAID/Tanzania 

686 Old Bagamoyo Road, Msasani 

P. O. Box 9130 

Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 

 

 Name: Nihal Montasser 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: nmontasser@usaid.gov 

 

Name: Catherine Ryoba 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: cryoba@usaid.gov 

Mail Address: USAID/Tanzania 

686 Old Bagamoyo Road, Msasani 

P. O. Box 9130 

Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please refer to USAID ADS 
205 found at Here for more information on integrating this policy into the applicant’s approach. 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

A. Special Provisions 

 

LIMITING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES (AUGUST 2013) 

 

a) Construction is not eligible for reimbursement under this award unless specifically identified in 
paragraph d) below. 

 

b) Construction means —construction, alteration, or repair (including dredging and excavation) of 
buildings, structures, or other real property and includes, without limitation, improvements, 
renovation, alteration and refurbishment. The term includes, without limitation, roads, power 
plants, buildings, bridges, water treatment facilities, and vertical structures. 

 

c) Agreement Officers will not approve any subawards or procurements by recipients for 
construction activities that are not listed in paragraph d) below. USAID will reimburse allowable 
costs for only the construction activities listed in this provision not to exceed the amount specified 
in the construction line item of the award budget. The recipient must receive prior written 
approval from the AO to transfer funds allotted for construction activities to other cost categories, 
or vice versa. 

 

d) Description [No construction activities are authorized under this activity] 

 


f) The recipient must include this provision in all subawards and procurements and make 














vendors providing services under this award and subrecipients aware of the restrictions of this 
provision. 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

USAID IMPLEMENTING PARTNER NOTICES (IPN) PORTAL FOR ASSISTANCE 

(JULY 2014) 

 

(a) Definitions 

 

“USAID Implementing Partner Notices (IPN) Portal for Assistance (“IPN Portal)” means the 
single point where USAID posts proposed universal bilateral amendments for USAID awards, 
which can be accessed electronically by registered USAID recipients. The IPN Portal is located at 
https://sites.google.com/site/usaidipnforassistance/. Universal amendments are those which affect 
all assistance awards or a designated class of awards as specified in each amendment by the IPN 
Portal Administrator. 

 

“IPN Portal Administrator” means the USAID official designated by the Director, M/OAA, who 
has overall responsibility for managing the USAID Implementing Partner Notices Portal for 
Assistance. 

 

“Universal bilateral amendment” means those amendments with revisions or new requirements or 
provisions that affect all awards or a designated class of awards, as specified in the Agency 
notification of such revisions or new requirements. 

 

(b) By submission of an application and execution of an award, the Applicant/Recipient 
acknowledges the requirement to: 

 

 (1) Register with the IPN Portal if awarded an assistance award resulting from this solicitation, 
and 

 

 (2) Receive universal bilateral amendments to this award and general notices via the IPN 
Portal. 

 

(c) Procedure to register for notifications. 

 

Go to https://sites.google.com/site/usaidipnforassistance/ and click the “Register” button at the 
top of the page. Recipient representatives must use their official organization email address when 
subscribing, not personal email addresses. 

 

(d) Processing of IPN Portal Amendments 

The Recipient may access the IPN Portal at any time to review all IPN Portal amendments; 
however, the system will also notify the Recipient by email when the USAID IPN Portal 
Administrator posts a universal bilateral amendment for Recipient’s review and signature. 


Proposed USAID IPN Portal amendments distributed via the IPN Portal are applicable to all 
awards, unless otherwise noted in the proposed amendment. 

 

Within 15 calendar days from receipt of the notification email from the IPN Portal, the Recipient 
must do one of the following: 

 

(1) (a) verify applicability of the proposed amendment for their award(s) per the 
instructions provided with each amendment; (b) download the amendment and 
incorporate the following information on the amendment form: award number, 
organization name, and organization mailing address as it appears in the basic 
award; (c) sign the hardcopy version; and (d) send the signed amendment (by 
email or hardcopy) to the AO for signature. The Recipient must not incorporate 
any other changes to the IPN Portal amendment. Bilateral amendments provided 
through the IPN Portal are not effective until the both the Recipient and the AO 
sign the amendment. 




 

 (2) Notify the AO in writing if the amendment requires negotiation of additional changes to 
terms and conditions of the award; or 

 

 (3) Notify the AO that the Recipient declines to sign the amendment. 

Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a signed amendment from the Recipient, the AO must 
provide the fully executed amendment to the Recipient or initiate discussions with the Recipient. 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (JUNE 2012) 

 

The recipient must not discriminate against people with disabilities in the implementation of 
USAID funded programs and should demonstrate a comprehensive and consistent approach for 
including men, women, and children with disabilities. 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE 
AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

a. One of the objectives of the USAID Disability Policy is to engage other U.S. Government 
agencies, host country counterparts, governments, implementing organizations, and other donors 
in fostering a climate of nondiscrimination against people with disabilities. As part of this policy 
USAID has established standards for any new or renovation construction project funded by 
USAID to allow access by people with disabilities (PWDs). The full text of the policy paper can 
be found at the following Website: https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PDABQ631.pdf 

 

b. USAID requires the recipient to comply with standards of accessibility for people with 
disabilities in all structures, buildings or facilities resulting from new or renovation construction 
or alterations of an existing structure. 


 c. The recipient will comply with the host country or regional standards for accessibility in 
construction when such standards result in at least substantially equivalent accessibility and 
usability as the standard provided in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 and the 
Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) Accessibility Guidelines of July 2004. Where there are no host 
country or regional standards for universal access or where the host country or regional standards 
fail to meet the ADA/ABA threshold, the standard prescribed in the ADA and the ABA will be 
used. 

 

d. New Construction. All new construction will comply with the above standards for accessibility. 

 

e. Alterations. Changes to an existing structure that affect, the usability of the structure will 
comply with the above standards for accessibility unless the recipient obtains the Agreement 
Officer’s advance approval that compliance is technically infeasible or constitutes an undue 
burden or both. Compliance is technically infeasible where structural conditions would require 
removing or altering a load-bearing member that is an essential part of the structural frame or 
because other existing physical or site constraints prohibit modification or addition of elements, 
spaces, or features that are in full and strict compliance with the minimum requirements of the 
standard. Compliance is an undue burden where it entails either a significant difficulty or expense 
or both. 

 

f. Exceptions. The following construction related activities are excepted from the requirements of 
paragraphs a. through d. above: (1) Normal maintenance, reroofing, painting or wall papering, or 
changes to mechanical or electrical systems are not alterations and the above standards do not 
apply unless they affect the accessibility of the building or facility; and (2) Emergency 
construction (which may entail the provision of plastic sheeting or tents, minor repair and 
upgrading of existing structures, rebuilding of part of existing structures, or provision of 
temporary structures) intended to be temporary in nature. A portion of emergency construction 
assistance may be provided to people with disabilities as part of the process of identifying 
disaster- and crisis-affected people as “most vulnerable.” 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD MANAGEMENT (November 
2020) 

 

a. Requirement for System for Award Management (SAM). Unless you are exempted from 
this requirement under 2 CFR 25.110, you as the recipient must maintain current information in 
the SAM. This includes information on your immediate and highest-level owner and subsidiaries, 
as well as on all of your predecessors that have been awarded a federal contract or Federal 
financial assistance within the last three years, if applicable, until you submit the final financial 
report required under this Federal award or receive the final payment, whichever is later. This 
requires that you review and update the information at least annually after the initial registration, 
and more frequently, if required by changes in your information or another Federal award term. 

 


b. Requirement for Unique Entity Identifier. If you are authorized to make subawards under 
this Federal award, you: 

 

(1) Must notify potential subrecipients that no entity (see definition in paragraph c. of this 
award term) may receive a subaward from you until the entity has provided its Unique 
Entity Identifier to you. 
(2) Unique Entity Identifier means the identifier assigned by SAM to uniquely identify 
business entities. 


 

c. Definitions. For purposes of this term: 

(1) System for Award Management (SAM) means the Federal repository into which a 
recipient must provide information required for the conduct of business as a recipient. 
Additional information about registration procedures may be found at the SAM Internet 
site (currently at https://www.sam.gov). 
(2) Unique Entity Identifier means the identifier assigned by SAM to uniquely identify 
business entities. 
(3) Entity includes non-Federal entities as defined in 2 CFR 200.1 and also includes all of the 
following, for purposes of this part: 


 

a. A foreign organization 
b. A foreign public entity 
c. A domestic for-profit organization; and 
d. A Federal agency. 




 

(4) Subaward has the meaning given in 2 CFR 200.1. 
(5) Subrecipient has the meaning given in 2 CFR 200.1. 


 

ADDENDUM (NOVEMBER 2020): 

 

d. Exceptions. The requirements of this provision to obtain a Unique Entity Identifier and 
maintain a current registration in the SAM do not apply, at the prime award or subaward level, to: 

(1) Awards to individuals 
(2) Awards less than $25,000, with no anticipated subawards, to foreign organizations to be 
performed outside the United States (based on a USAID determination) 
(3) Awards where the Agreement Officer determines, in writing, that the Agency must protect 
entity information from disclosure due to national security or foreign policy interests of 
the United States or that these requirements would cause personal safety concerns. 


 

e. This provision does not need to be included in subawards. 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION (November 2020) 

 

a. Reporting of first-tier subawards. 

 


(1) Applicability. Unless you are exempt as provided in paragraph d. of this award term, you 
must report each action that equals or exceeds $30,000 in Federal funds for a subaward to 
a non-Federal entity or Federal agency (see definitions in paragraph e. of this award term). 
(2) Where and when to report 
(i) The non-Federal entity or Federal agency must report each obligating action 
described in paragraph a.(1) of this award term to www.fsrs.gov. 
(ii) For subaward information, report no later than the end of the month following the 
month in which the obligation was made. (For example, if the obligation was made 
on November 7, 2010, the obligation must be reported by no later than December 
31, 2010.) 
(3) What to report. You must report the information about each obligating action that the 
submission instructions posted at www.fsrs.gov specify. 


 

b. Reporting total compensation of recipient executives for non-Federal entities. 

 

(1) Applicability and what to report. You must report total compensation for each of your five 
most highly compensated executives for the preceding completed fiscal year, if – 


 

(i) The total Federal funding authorized to date under this Federal award equals or 
exceeds $30,000 as defined in 2 CFR 170.320. 
(ii) In the preceding fiscal year, you received— 


 

(A) 80 percent or more of your annual gross revenues from Federal 
procurement contracts (and subcontracts) and Federal financial 
assistance subject to the Transparency Act, as defined at 2 CFR 
170.320 (and subawards); and 
(B) $25,000,000 or more in annual gross revenues from Federal 
procurement contracts (and subcontracts) and Federal financial 
assistance subject to the Transparency Act, as defined at 2 CFR 
170.320 (and subawards); and 








 

(2) Where and when to report. You must report executive total compensation described in 
paragraph b.(1) of this award term: 


 

(i) As part of your registration profile at www.sam.gov. 
(ii) By the end of the month following the month in which this award is made, and 
annually thereafter. 


 

c. Reporting of Total Compensation of Subrecipient Executives. 

 

(1) Applicability and what to report. Unless you are exempt as provided in paragraph d. of 
this award term, for each first-tier non-Federal entity subrecipient under this award, you 
must report the names and total compensation of each of the subrecipient’s five most 
highly compensated executives for the subrecipient’s preceding completed fiscal year, if– 


 

(i) In the subrecipient's preceding fiscal year, the subrecipient received— 



 

(A) 80 percent or more of its annual gross revenues from Federal 
procurement contracts (and subcontracts) and Federal financial 
assistance subject to the Transparency Act, as defined at 2 CFR 
170.320 (and subawards); and 
(B) $25,000,000 or more in annual gross revenues from Federal 
procurement contracts (and subcontracts), and Federal financial 
assistance subject to the Transparency Act (and subawards); and 






 

(ii) The public does not have access to information about the compensation of the 
executives through periodic reports filed under section 13(a) or 15(d) of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m(a), 78o(d)) or section 6104 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986. (To determine if the public has access to the 
compensation information, see the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission total 
compensation filings at www.sec.gov/answers/execomp.htm.) 


 

(2) Where and when to report. You must report subrecipient executive total compensation 
described in paragraph c.(1) of this award term: 


 

(i) To the recipient. 
(ii) By the end of the month following the month during which you make the 
subaward. For example, if a subaward is obligated on any date during the month of 
October of a given year (for example, between October 1 and 31), you must report 
any required compensation information of the subrecipient by November 30 of that 
year. 


 

d. Exemptions. 

 

If, in the previous tax year, you had gross income, from all sources, under $300,000, you are 
exempt from the requirements to report: 

 

(1) Subawards, and 
(2) The total compensation of the five most highly compensated executives of any 
subrecipient. 


 

e. Definitions. 

 

For purposes of this award term: 

 

(1) Federal Agency means a Federal agency as defined at 5 U.S.C. 551(1) and further clarified 
by 5 U.S.C. 552(f). 
(2) Non-Federal entity means all of the following, as defined in 2 CFR 25: 


 

(i) A governmental organization, which is a State, local government, or Indian tribe. 
(ii) A foreign public entity. 
(iii) A domestic or foreign nonprofit organization; and 



(iv) A domestic or foreign for-profit organization. 


 

(3) Executive means officers, managing partners, or any other employees in management 
positions. 
(4) Subaward: 


 

(i) This term means a legal instrument to provide support for the performance of any 
portion of the substantive project or program for which you received this award 
and that you as the recipient award to an eligible subrecipient. 
(ii) The term does not include your procurement of property and services needed to 
carry out the project or program (for further explanation, see 2 CFR 200.331). 
(iii) A subaward may be provided through any legal agreement, including an agreement 
that you or a subrecipient considers a contract. 


 

(5) Subrecipient means a non-Federal entity or Federal agency that: 


 

(i) Receives a subaward from you (the recipient) under this award; and 
(ii) Is accountable to you for the use of the Federal funds provided by the subaward. 


 

(6) Total compensation means the cash and noncash dollar value earned by the executive 
during the recipient’s or subrecipient’s preceding fiscal year and includes the following 
(for more information see 17 CFR 229.402(c)(2)): 


 

(i) Salary and bonus. 
(ii) Awards of stock, stock options, and stock appreciation rights. Use the dollar 
amount recognized for financial statement reporting purposes with respect to the 
fiscal year in accordance with the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 
No. 123 (Revised 2004) (FAS 123R), Shared Based Payments. 
(iii) Earnings for services under nonequity incentive plans. This does not include group 
life, health, hospitalization, or medical reimbursement plans that do not 
discriminate in favor of executives and are available generally to all salaried 
employees. 
(iv) Change in pension value. This is the change in present value of defined benefit and 
actuarial pension plans. 
(v) Above-market earnings on deferred compensation which is not tax-qualified. 
(vi) Other compensation, if the aggregate value of all such other compensation (for 
example, severance, termination payments, value of life insurance paid on behalf 
of the employee, perquisites or property) for the executive exceeds $10,000. 


 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

BRANDING STRATEGY - ASSISTANCE (JUNE 2012) 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, activity, or activity is named and positioned, and 
how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 



b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers 
no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, 
in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated 
Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such 
as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 
(2) The intended name of the program, activity, or activity. 
(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” 
comprised of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the 
American people” as found on the USAID Web site at 
https://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or APS 
states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made 
possible by (or with) the generous support of the American People” next 
to the USAID Identity when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and 
the applicant's identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, 
the applicant must explain how USAID's involvement will be 
showcased during publicity for the program or activity. 
(v) USAID prefers to fund activities that do not have a separate logo 
or identity that competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to 
develop a separate logo to consistently identify this program, the 
applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI of the 
RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this activity or program, 
including direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the 
program to beneficiaries. 
(i) Describe the main program message. 



(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public 
service announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as 
appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program 
or activity to host country citizens, such as media releases, press 
conferences, public events, and so forth. Applicant must incorporate the 
USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the American 
People.” 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the 
American people support this activity or program. 
(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 
(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program 
materials and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be 
visibly acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 
f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information 
is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 
applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 
g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 


[END OF PROVISION] 

PROHIBITION ON PROVIDING FEDERAL ASSISTANCE TO ENTITIES THAT 
REQUIRE CERTAIN INTERNAL CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENTS – 
REPRESENTATION (MAY 2017) 

 

a) Definitions. “Contract” has the meaning given in 2 CFR Part 200. “Contractor” means an 
entity that receives a contract as defined in 2 CFR Part 200. “Internal confidentiality 
agreement or statement” means a confidentiality agreement or any other written statement 
that the Recipient requires any of its employees or Sub-Recipients to sign regarding 
nondisclosure of Recipient information, except that it does not include confidentiality 
agreements arising out of civil litigation or confidentiality agreements that Recipient 
employees or subrecipients sign at the behest of a federal agency. “Subaward” has the 
meaning given in 2 CFR Part 200. “Subrecipient” has the meaning given in 2 CFR Part 
200. 


 

b) In accordance with section 743 of Division E, Title VII, of the Consolidated and Further 
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235) and its successor provisions in 
subsequent appropriations acts (and as extended in continuing resolutions), Government 
agencies are not permitted to use funds appropriated (or otherwise made available) for 
federal assistance to a nonfederal entity that requires its employees, subrecipients, or 
contractors seeking to report waste, fraud, or abuse to sign internal confidentiality 
agreements or statements that prohibit or otherwise restrict its employees, subrecipients, 
or contractors from lawfully reporting such waste, fraud, or abuse to a designated 



investigative or law enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency 
authorized to receive such information. 


 

c) The prohibition in paragraph (b) of this provision does not contravene requirements 
applicable to Standard Form 312, (Classified Information Nondisclosure Agreement), 
Form 4414 (Sensitive Compartmented Information Nondisclosure Agreement), or any 
other form issued by a Federal department or agency governing the nondisclosure of 
classified information. 


 

d) Representation. By submission of its application, the prospective Recipient represents that 
it will not require its employees, subrecipients, or contractors to sign or comply with 
internal confidentiality agreements or statements prohibiting or otherwise restricting its 
employees, subrecipients, or contractors from lawfully reporting waste, fraud, or abuse 
related to the performance of a Federal award to a designated investigative or law 
enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency authorized to receive such 
information (for example, the Agency Office of the Inspector General). 


 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN TELECOMMUNICATION AND VIDEO 
SURVEILLANCE SERVICES OR EQUIPMENT (JULY 2022) 

 

a. In accordance with the cost principles in 2 CFR § 200.471, obligating or expending costs for 
covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment or services as 
described in 2 CFR § 200.216 are unallowable. Recipients and subrecipients are prohibited from 
using award funds, including direct and indirect costs, cost share and program income, for such 
covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment. This provision 

implements temporary waivers granted to USAID under Section 889(d)(2) that allow the recipient 
to use award funds for: 

 

(1) All costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment 
incurred through September 30, 2022; and 


(2) Costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment 
incurred on or after October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2028, only if the recipient has 
determined that there is no available alternate eligible source for the covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment. 

 

b. After September 30, 2028, in accordance with 2 CFR § 200.471 costs of all covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR § 
200.216 will be unallowable. 

 

c. The Recipient must include this provision in all subawards, and contracts issued under this 
award. 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 


B. Applicable Regulations and References 

 

Mandatory Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303maa.pdf 

 

Mandatory Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mab.pdf 

 

Standard Provisions for Public International Organizations: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/308.pdf 

 

Certifications, Assurances, Other Statements of the Recipient and Solicitation Standard 

Provisions 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mav.pdf 

 

2 CFR 200 Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for 

Federal Awards 

http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 

 

2 CFR 700 Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for 

Federal Awards 

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 

 

ADS 303 – Grants and Cooperative Agreements to Non-Governmental Organizations 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303.pdf 

 

48 CFR 31.2 - Contracts with Commercial Organizations 

https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/CFR-2011-title48-vol1/CFR-2011-title48-vol1-part31-
subpart31-2/content-detail.html 

 

22 CFR 228: Rules for Procurement of Commodities and Services Financed by USAID 

https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2012-title22-vol1/pdf/CFR-2012-title22-vol1-part228.pdf 

 

SF-424 Downloads 

Federal Financial Report | GSA 

 

C. Additional Resources 

• Initial Environmental Examination (Attached) 

• Government of Tanzania (GOT) Priorities and Strategies Here 

D. Special Provisions for USAID/Tanzania 

 

 

 


PRESS RELEASES, MEDIA ENGAGEMENTS, AND PUBLIC EVENTS 

“All press releases will be approved by the USAID/Tanzania AOR. The Recipient will provide 
copies of draft press releases as well as relevant project photos for review with at least two weeks 
advance notice prior to the planned release date. When the Recipient leadership address the media 
or are requested by the media to comment about the activity, the concerned program staff shall 
acknowledge U.S. Government support. Project staff will also acknowledge the source of funds 
when granting interviews, speaking with journalists, or making speeches and presentations. The 
Recipient must inform USAID of planned speaking engagements with press and media. When the 
Recipient unexpectedly speaks with the press, the Recipient must notify the AOR immediately 
afterward (within 4 hours). 

 

The Recipient will inform and confer with USAID/Tanzania in advance of issuing an invitation to 
the GOT to speak and/or be the guest of honor at a public event. The Recipient will provide the 
USAID/Tanzania AOR with at least two weeks of lead time and notification about public events. 
In the instance of program activities that require the attendance of USAID personnel, the below 
guidelines on events must be adhered to: 

• Requested attendance of the Ambassador, DCM, and/or Mission Director will be 
communicated at least four weeks prior to the event; and 

• Requested remarks by the Ambassador, DCM, and/or Mission Director will be 
communicated at least four weeks prior to the event AND the Recipient will provide draft 
talking points to USAID at least one week prior to the event 

• Requested attendance of other USAID Mission staff representatives will be 
communicated at least three weeks prior to the event.” 

 

ACTIVITY INTEGRATION 

Integration is a key component of USAID/Tanzania’s Country Development Cooperation 
Strategy (CDCS). The CDCS advances USAID’s core values of empowerment and inclusion and 
key principles of engagement which include partnership, capacity building, integration, and 
learning. The Mission recognizes the complexity of Tanzania’s development challenges and the 
value of addressing them using multiple tools and perspectives that cross sectors. Integration is 
defined broadly as “Partnering to apply sound development principles and practices to address 
political, economic, social and governance factors across sectors to improve the sustainability of 
development investments and results.” In short, the Recipient should seek opportunities to partner 
and collaborate across sectors to improve the sustainability and impact of planned outcomes and 
results. 

 

The Recipient is expected to include an Integration Reporting section in the Quarterly and Annual 
Reports and describe how the Recipient has incorporated integrated development approaches into 
its work and established platforms of coordination and collaboration among other development 
partners and local stakeholders in the country to maximize impact and sustainability of the 
Activity objectives. Additionally, USAID/Tanzania may develop Integration Indicators that, once 
approved, will be applied to this Activity. 

 

It is expected that the Recipient will jointly plan, collaborate, and share information with other 
USAID-funded implementers to learn, bring best practices to scale, and ensure that OVC Next 
Generation activity beneficiaries benefit from the integration of activities. 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Object Class Category 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Total 

a. Personnel 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

b. Fringe Benefits 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

c. Travel 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

d. Equipment and Supplies 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

e. Sub-awards 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

f. Participant Training 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

g. Other Direct Costs 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

h. Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

i. Total Direct Charges (a - h) 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

j. Indirect Charges 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

k. TOTALS (i and j) 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 

$ 



 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain 
the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory and 
required as applicable) in full text. 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 




 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (APRIL 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 


