NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 


Issue Date: February 22, 2021 
Questions Due: March 1st, 2021, 12pm Noon (Morocco Time) 
Closing Date & Time: March 22, 2021, 12pm Noon (Morocco Time) 
Subject: USAID/Morocco Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 
72060821RFA00001 

Program/Opportunity Title: Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

To: All Interested Respondents/Parties: 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Morocco 
(USAID/Morocco) is seeking applications for a cooperative agreement from qualified entities to 
implement the Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA). 

USAID intends to make an award to the responsible applicant whose application best meets the 
objectives of this funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO 
subject to a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in applying are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. While one award is anticipated as a result of this Notice of Funding 
Opportunity (NOFO), USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

Subject to funds availability, the anticipated funding for the USAID/Morocco REMA is $3 
million over a three-year period. Final authority for assistance awards resides with the USAID/ 
Morocco Agreement Officer. 


To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is 
posted on www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the entire NOFO has been 
received from the internet in its entirety and USAID bears no responsibility for data errors 
resulting from transmission or conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on 
www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 
1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D . 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin registration early in the process. 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted on www.grants.gov . 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted 
at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

Sincerely, 

Zachary Clarke 
Regional Agreement Officer 
USAID/Morocco 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Abbreviations and Acronyms ……………………………………………………….…………....4 
Section A – Program Description………………………………………………….…………….. 5 
Section B – Award Information…………...………………………………..…….………..…….13 
Section C – Eligibility Information…………………………………...…………….…………...15 
Section D – Application and Submission Information………………..………………………....16 
Section E – Application Review Information………………………………..…………………..39 
Section F – Award and Administration Information………………………………..…………...43 
Section G – Agency Contacts……………………………………………………………………55 
Section H – Other Information……………………………………………………….………….56 
Section I – Annexes…………………………………….……………..….……………………...57 
Annex 1…………………...……………….……….……………..….…………………..57 
Annex 2…………………………..……….…………………………….…....…………..60 
Annex 3……………………………..…………………….…………….………………..62 
Annex 4………………………………………………….…………….…………..….….63 
Annex 5………………………………………………….…………….…………..….….64 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

ADS Automated Directive Services 

AO Agreement Officer 

AOR Agreement Officer Representative 

BEO Bureau Environmental Officer 

CDCS Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

CRM Climate Risk Management 

DDL Development Data Library 

DEC Development Exchange Clearinghouse 

DUNS Data Universal Numbering System 

GDO General Development Office 

GLAAS Global Acquisition and Assistance System 

GOM: Government of Morocco 

IR Intermediate Result 

LOC Letter of Credit 

M/B/IO Missions, Bureaus, and Independent Office 

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 

MEL Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 

MTDC Modified Total Direct Costs 

NGO Non-Governmental Organization 

NICRA Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement 

NOFO Notice of Funding Opportunity 

PAD Project Appraisal Design 

PIEE Programmatic Initial Environmental Examination 

PPI Past Performance Information 

REMA Religious Ethnic Minorities Activity 

RFA Request for Applications 

SAM System for Award Management 

TIN Taxpayer Identification Number 

U.S. United States 
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. For US organizations the resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform 
Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and 
USAID’s supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. For 
non-US organizations the resulting award will be subject to the Standard Provisions for Non-US 
Non-governmental Organizations found in ADS 303 and the requirements found in Section F. 

I. ACTIVITY TITLE 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

II. ACTIVITY GOAL AND OBJECTIVES 
The goal of this activity is to promote religious tolerance and community efforts that preserve 
cultural heritage sites of religious and ethnic minorities in Morocco through two overarching 
objectives: 

Objective 1: Enhance Religious and Cultural Preservation, Learning, and Social Cohesion. 
Objective 2: Support Initiatives that Promote Tolerance, Interfaith Dialogue, and 
Multiculturalism. 

USAID/Morocco is seeking to support focused, innovative, and realistic approaches that would 
lead to the achievement of those objectives. 

III. BACKGROUND 
In recent years, Morocco has emerged as a regional leader in interfaith dialogue. The 
Government of Morocco (GOM) is taking concrete steps to engage Moroccan and international 
stakeholders in initiatives that promote tolerance and facilitate intercultural and interfaith 
dialogue. The GOM recognizes that the country’s rich historical pluralism, tolerance, and 
protection of religious minorities are key pillars of Morocco’s unique national identity. The 
preservation of the historic and cultural heritage of these groups supports the country’s social 
fabric as a whole. 

The 2011 Constitution of the Kingdom of Morocco1 celebrates the shared heritage of its diverse 
citizenry and the central role that all communities have played in creating Morocco’s unique 
social makeup: 
“A sovereign Muslim State, attached to its national unity and to its territorial integrity, the 
Kingdom of Morocco intends to preserve, in its plentitude and its diversity, its one and indivisible 
national identity. Its unity is forged by the convergence of its Arab-Islamic, Amazigh and 
Saharan-Hassanic components, nourished and enriched by its African, Andalusian, Hebraic and 

1 https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/Morocco_2011.pdf 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

Mediterranean influences. The preeminence accorded to the Muslim religion in the national 
reference is consistent with the attachment of the Moroccan people to the values of openness, of 
moderation, of tolerance and of dialog for mutual understanding between all the cultures and 
the civilizations of the world.” 

The globalized world in which we all live has resulted in not only global migrations of citizens 
in search of better economic opportunities elsewhere, but also the influence of intolerant 
narratives on populations that previously enjoyed amicable and collaborative relationships. This 
has resulted in many citizens of Morocco emigrating and establishing their lives outside of the 
Kingdom, particularly minority groups. Some retain religious, cultural, civic and property links 
with Morocco, but many do not. A result of these trends has been a significant shift in the 
demographics in the Kingdom, where most of Morocco’s Jewish community now lives outside 
the Kingdom. Those that remain are concentrated primarily in large urban centers and no longer 
have an appreciable presence in rural and smaller urban areas. So where many Moroccans 
previously lived and interacted closely with someone of another faith, today’s Moroccan youth 
may have little to no experience with someone in their community from a different religious 
background. 

In addition to the diversity that once characterized Morocco’s past, migration has also brought 
new communities that have established longer-term residency in the kingdom. Christian and 
other religious communities of many ethno-linguistic cultural groups, particularly from sub-
Saharan Africa, driven by economic or educational opportunities, now make Morocco their 
home, even if not permanently. These communities too, however, are largely concentrated in 
urban centers and do not necessarily have the same degree of integration as earlier minority 
religious communities. Morocco has long been and continues to host communities from other 
countries that have resided in the Kingdom and created distinct short and long-term religious and 
ethnic communities. This too is an important part of the Moroccan story of tolerance and 
coexistence. 

It is in the spirit of these broader U.S. and Moroccan Government efforts that USAID/Morocco 
seeks to support programming around the preservation of REM in the Kingdom. 

IV. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 
The goal of this activity is to support grassroots local initiatives to celebrate and preserve 
Morocco’s unique social heritage of peaceful coexistence. Activities may include work to refurbish 
or rehabilitate important sites, such as former houses of worship, cemeteries, and other institutions 
or locations of cultural and historical importance and must focus on promoting community efforts 
to preserve those cultural heritage sites of religious and ethnic minorities in Morocco. Activities 
that promote religious tolerance and interfaith dialogue are similarly encouraged but should aim 
to engage broadly within and between communities at all levels, including among youth, and 
taking into consideration employability as a means to increase the long-term interest in and 
sustainability of the religious and cultural preservation efforts. 

The focus of this activity is on integrated work to increase familiarity with contributions of diverse 
communities to Moroccan history, particularly those outlined in the preamble to the Moroccan 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

constitution, but also the historical interactions with Christian residents for short or long periods 
in the country. A core principle of this activity is that efforts to be funded should not benefit one 
community; this is a project for Morocco and all Moroccan citizens and residents. 

In order to best leverage local knowledge, develop local capacity and ensure local ownership and 
sustainability, applicants will be required to demonstrate how they will engage with local partner 
organizations, including working with them as sub-partners. 

Broadly, interventions should work towards achieving the following objectives: 

A. Objective 1: Promote the Preservation of Religious and Cultural Heritage and Social 
Cohesion 
The focus of interventions that include preservation or rehabilitation of buildings or artifacts 
should be on the preservation of both tangible and intangible heritage, including memories and 
experiences, as well as the preservation of structures. This can include immediate-term 
preservation efforts, albeit through processes that engage the broader majority community through 
shared Moroccan history and identity. Restoration of buildings and sites, particularly cemeteries, 
can quickly overwhelm resources and require long-term investments that only community and 
potentially local public investment can sustain. Restoration should only be done as part of a 
broader educational and community engagement effort in order to promote local ownership 
and commitment to sustainability. 

Expected results: 

● 
Community ownership and appreciation of the shared heritage promoted. 
● 
Preservation and restoration of tangible and intangible Moroccan religious and cultural 
heritage advanced. 
● 
Long-term interest in and sustainability of the religious and cultural preservation efforts 
are increased. 
B. Objective 2: Support Initiatives that Promote Tolerance, Interfaith Dialogue, and 
Multiculturalism 
As Moroccan diversity becomes more siloed, opportunities to engage with other cultural and 
religious groups are diminished. Therefore, it is increasingly important to bring diverse social 
groups together to have opportunities to learn about each other's common values and unique 
heritages. USAID/Morocco recognizes the need for innovative approaches to sustainably 
(including economically) preserve heritage while enhancing opportunities for multicultural 
education for the public. Sustainable partnerships founded on shared values are essential for 
successful programs. The focus of interventions under this objective should be on supporting 
locally led initiatives that contribute to advancing tolerance, interfaith dialogue, and 
multiculturalism. 

Expected Results: 

● 
Locally led initiatives that contribute to advancing tolerance, interfaith dialogue, and 
multiculturalism sustainably implemented. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

● 
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue promoted. 
● 
Sustainable interfaith and intercultural initiatives and partnerships established. 
Note: If construction is included in this award then it will be in accordance with ADS 303.3.30 
Limitation on Construction under Assistance. 
“Construction” for purposes of this policy means: construction, alteration, or repair (including 
dredging and excavation) of buildings, structures, or other real property and includes, without 
limitation, improvements, renovation, alteration and refurbishment. The term includes, without 
limitation, roads, power plants, buildings, bridges, water treatment facilities, and vertical 
structures. 

V. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
STRUCTURAL CHANGE 

To the extent feasible, in undertaking the above, applicants will engage communities broadly in 
ways that build up community ownership of the efforts so that they will be sustained beyond the 
conclusion of the USAID-funded activity. In order to more holistically address these issues, 
USAID/Morocco encourages work with relevant governmental and non-governmental institutions, 
including efforts to work with the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Culture, etc. 

ENGAGEMENT OF DIASPORAS 

Citizenship and residency in the 21st century are not binary. Applicants may explore opportunities 
to bring members of the Moroccan diaspora into collaborative relationships with compatriots in 
Morocco. Efforts between communities within Morocco and those in the diaspora could also 
contribute to improved relations between communities in which the diaspora reside. Applicants 
may consider how programming is also linked to more directly address these broader bridging 
dynamics through the engagement of the Moroccan diaspora, particularly in ways that support the 
sustainability of efforts. 

VI. CONCEPTUAL APPROACH AND LINKAGES 
A. Conceptual Approach 
This overarching approach aims to increase confidence of REM populations in public-serving 
institutions, while decreasing their vulnerabilities to social, economic, and political 
marginalization by promoting stronger citizen-to-citizen relations and citizen-to-state relations. 
Applicants must provide a clear description of the overall objectives, the results to be achieved, 
the resources and steps required to meet them in an identifiable period of time, and benchmark 
measures of progress towards achievement by addressing the following: 

● 
Sustainability: Sustainability is central to the objectives and design of this activity. 
The applicant must identify the elements of sustainability considered essential to achieve 
the activity goal and describe how sustainability objectives will be integrated and how 
benefits and results will continue beyond the life of the program. In addition, proposed 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

activities must promote, strengthen and be supported by sustainable local organizations 
that champion sound concepts, innovative practices and changes beyond the life of the 
award through targeting key people and seeking social and institutional change. 
USAID/Morocco encourages supporting local organizations and working with new 
partners to build their capacity to manage the U.S. Government awards. 

● 
Gender Equality and Female Empowerment: USAID/Morocco is dedicated to 
gender equality, the empowerment and protection of women and girls as key factors for 
achieving our broader development and humanitarian objectives. USAID/Morocco is also 
committed to adhering to USAID ADS Chapters 201 & 205 and USAID’s Gender Equality 
and Female Empowerment Policy2 requirements, which focus on integration of gender 
equality and female empowerment in all stages of the program cycle. The applicant must 
assess gender gaps and identify programming opportunities that are essential to promoting 
gender equal access to, participation in and benefits from services / technical assistance 
that will be provided under proposed activities. 
● 
Local Solutions and Partnerships: USAID/Morocco encourages applications 
from partnerships or consortia, including arrangements whereby local organizations are 
included in the implementation of the activities. In this context, partnerships are defined 
as a negotiated arrangement among organizations that provides for a substantive, 
collaborative role for each of the partners in the planning and implementation of the 
program. Applicants intending to represent a coalition of providers should be prepared to 
provide, if requested, a signed partnership agreement stating: 
○ 
an intent to commit or receive resources from the prospective partner(s) 
contingent upon receipt of funds; 
○ 
how the partnership arrangement advances the objectives of the program; 
○ 
supporting documentation identifying the resources, experience, and expertise 
of the partner(s); 
○ 
evidence that the partner(s) has been involved in the planning of the program; 
and clarification of the role of the partner(s) in the implementation of the 
program, evaluation, and sustainability and financial relationships. 
● 
Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA): USAID’s Collaborating, Learning 
and Adapting (CLA) approach ensures that USAID/Morocco’s Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) works as a living strategy, providing guidance and reference 
points not only for implementation, but also for learning and course correction as needed. 
The Implementing Partner is encouraged to conduct a periodic analysis of results, the 
enabling environment, context, and key assumptions. This analysis will ensure that the 
recipient is responding to and implementing within the constraints and opportunities that 
may influence the ultimate success of the activity. The Implementing Partner will facilitate 
an innovative learning approach from Morocco’s contextual dynamics and stakeholder 
engagement. This will enable the activity to evolve implementation to achieve results. To 
complement the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (ME&L) functions, the 
2 USAID, “Gender Equality and Female Empowerment Policy” (2020), available at 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/USAID_GenderEquality_Policy_MT_WEB_single_508.pdf 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

Implementing Partner will continuously review progress and challenges, integrate lessons 
learned, and adapt interventions accordingly. The recipient is encouraged to invest in 
capacity strengthening in CLA for local actors to achieve results. The implementer should 
be familiar with the CLA approach outlined on the USAID Learning Lab 
(http://usaidlearninglab.org/) and incorporate a CLA approach or plan into the MEL Plan, 
described below. 

● 
Evaluation: If USAID decides to conduct an evaluation of this activity, the 
evaluation will be performed by a third-party contractor. Data and baseline information 
gathered by the recipient as part of their MEL Plan will be used to facilitate the evaluation 
to be conducted at the midpoint and/or in the final year of the activity. The Recipient will 
be expected to cooperate with and provide information to the external evaluation team 
throughout the life of the activity. 
● 
Institutional and Geographic Considerations 
a. Institutional Considerations: “Institutions” include governmental and nongovernmental 
structures that communities interact with in pursuit of their goals 
such as the commune, local government, the region council, schools, religious 
establishments, and civil society organizations. 
b. Potential Government of Morocco Partners include: 
-Wilayas and Prefectures 
-Rabita Al Mohammadia of Oulemas 
-National Initiative for Human Development (INDH) 
-Ministry of Youth, Sports, and Culture 
-Ministry of Tourism 
-National Archives of Morocco 
-National Museum Foundation 

c. Suggested Geographic Considerations: The following are the suggested 
geographic considerations for initial planning and application purposes; this 
geographic scope may be expanded in the future: 
-Marrakech-Safi region 
-Fes-Meknes region 
-Tangier-Tetouan-Al Hoceima region 
-Beni Mellal-Khenifra region 
-Draa-Tafilalet region 
-Note that suggested geographic considerations are for initial planning and 

application purposes; this scope may be expanded in the future. 

● 
Do No Harm Considerations: Throughout the application, the Applicant must 
reflect thoughtful consideration of any risks that may result by bringing together 
individuals and groups around sometimes sensitive topics and provide sufficient 
explanation of how appropriate safeguards will be put in place to avoid intensifying the 
tensions or creating harmful situations for participants. Do No Harm should not be an 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

isolated discussion in the application but be addressed holistically throughout all sections. 
Any program being implemented will become part of the context and thus, the impact of 
planned activities must be analyzed vis-à-vis how they will affect the environment. It is not 
satisfactory to simply indicate the program will “Do No Harm”; more thoughtful analysis 
and specific examples are necessary. The applicant must explain how the proposed 
program will not exacerbate tensions and explain how the Applicant will mitigate against 
any risks to do harm and ensure individuals or communities will not be placed at greater 
risk as a consequence of the program. 

B. Linkages 
The successful Full Application will also align closely with the broader priorities of 
USAID/W, USAID/Morocco, and the Government of Morocco including the following 
strategies and priorities: 

USAID/Morocco Strategy (CDCS): The Religious and Ethnic Minority Activity (REMA) 
will directly contribute to USAID/Morocco’s Country Development and Cooperation 
Strategy (CDCS) 2020-2025. This activity will support IR.3: Community resilience 
strengthened, and Sub-IR 3.3: Religious and cultural tolerance initiatives promoted. 

Government of Morocco National Strategy: The activity will reinforce the Government 
of Morocco's efforts to preserve the kingdom’s religious and cultural heritage, bridge 
religious divides, and uphold the rights of religious minorities. The applicant will seek 
collaboration and partnership with various Government of Morocco (GoM) religious and 
ethnic minorities initiatives. To ensure sustainability, partnerships could include the 
Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Tourism, National Archives of Morocco, the Rabita 
Mohammedia for Religious Councils. 

Linkages to USAID Learning: The applicant will use lessons learned from 
previous/ongoing USAID activities to inform implementation. The following are relevant 
documents and links: 

● 
Civil Society Organization Sustainability Index MENA: Civil society organization 
report (Morocco starting on page 47s). 
● 
2019 International Religious Freedom Report: State Department annual report on 
religious freedom (Morocco). 
● 
USAID and Religious Freedom on USAID’s website. 
VII. Award Administration 
The authorizing legislation for this award is the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, and 
it will be subject to 2 CFR 700 and 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost 
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, for US organizations, or the USAID ADS 
303 Standard Provisions, for non-US organizations. 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by USAID 
to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development Objectives. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” and “Project” as 
used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and implementation of USAID 
development assistance. 

[END OF SECTION A] 
THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 
Subject to the availability of funding and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID/Morocco intends 
to provide $3,000,000 in total USAID funding and anticipates supporting one (1) Cooperative 
Agreement over the course of three (3) years pursuant to this notice of funding opportunity. 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 
The period of performance anticipated herein is three (3) years . The estimated start date will be 
upon the signature of the award, anticipated for on or about September 30, 2021. 

3. Substantial Involvement 
Consistent with § 200.24 Cooperative Agreement and the USAID Automated Directive Services 
(ADS) 303.3.11 Substantial Involvement and Cooperative Agreements, USAID/Morocco 
anticipates having substantial involvement throughout the implementation of this Religious Ethnic 
Minorities Activity Cooperative Agreement. 

The Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) at USAID/Morocco will substantially be involved 
in the Cooperative Agreement. 
The Agreement Officer (AO) may delegate the approval listed in the items below to the AOR, 
except for authority to change the program description, the period of performance, the approved 
budget, and key personnel that require AO approval. 

USAID’s substantial involvement in the program will extend to: 

1. Approval of Annual Implementation Plans (workplans); 
2. Approval of the detailed Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL Plan); 
3. Approval of Key Personnel and any changes in Key Personnel; and 
4. Approval of the Recipient’s subawards managed through the award. 
4. Title to Property 
Property title under the resultant agreement shall vest with the recipient in accordance with the 
requirements of 2 CFR 200.310-316, or the Standard Provision titled “Title to and Use of Property 
(December 2014),” as applicable. 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 
The geographic code for this program is 937 (the United States, the recipient country, and 
developing countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is 
a prohibited source) for the procurement of commodities and services, per ADS 310.3.1.1. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 
The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Religious and Ethnic 
Minority Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. 

The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program 
objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of 
sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal 
funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and 
conditions of the Federal award. The Recipient, using its own unique combination of staff, 
facilities, and experience, has the primary responsibility for employing whatever form of sound 
organization and management techniques may be necessary in order to assure proper and efficient 
administration of the resulting award. 

7. Other Information 
Award will be made to a responsible Applicant(s) whose Full Application best meets the 
requirements of this NOFO and the selection criteria contained herein. Issuance of this NOFO does 
not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government, nor does it commit the 
Government to pay for costs incurred in the preparation and submission of a Full Application. In 
addition, final award of any resultant award cannot be made until funds have been fully 
appropriated, allocated, and committed through internal USAID procedures. While it is anticipated 
that these procedures will be successfully completed, the potential applicant is hereby notified of 
these requirements and conditions for award. The Application is submitted at the risk of the 
Applicant; should circumstances prevent an Award from being made, all preparation and 
submission costs are at the Applicant's expense. 

[END OF SECTION B] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

1. Eligible Applicants 
Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

The Applicant must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will be subject to a 
positive risk assessment by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

A positive risk assessment means that the applicant possesses or has the ability to obtain the 
necessary management competence to plan and carry out the assistance program to be funded, and 
that the applicant will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other 
assets provided by USAID. 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 
There is no cost sharing requirement anticipated under this award. 

3. Fee/Profit 
While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 
award Fee/Profit to prime recipients and subrecipients under assistance instruments. However, 
while Fee/Profit is not allowed for sub-awards, the prohibition does not apply when the recipient 
acquires goods and services in accordance with 2 CFR 200.317 -326, “Procurement Standards.” 
Forgone profit does not qualify as cost-share. 

[END OF SECTION C] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

1. Agency Point of Contact 
Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

Mr. Zachary Clarke 
Regional Agreement Officer 
USAID/MERP 

zclarke@usaid.gov 

The Point of Contact (POC) for information on this NOFO is: 

Ms. Salya Yacoubi 
Supervisory Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 
USAID/Morocco 

syacoubi@usaid.gov 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and 
any subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All applications must be 
submitted according to instructions contained in this NOFO. 

In order to maintain a fair and transparent funding opportunity, USAID maintains strict 
guidelines on who within USAID may be contacted regarding applications or questions 
about the opportunity. Applicants may only contact USAID via the email address provided 
in this NOFO. Failure to comply with the USAID points of contact guidance mandated in 
the NOFO may disqualify the Applicant(s). 

2. Questions and Answers 
Questions and requests for clarification regarding this NOFO should be submitted by email 
to syacoubi@usaid.gov with a copy to usaidmoroccocontracts@usaid.gov no later than the 
date and time indicated on the cover letter. The subject line must read “Religious Ethnic 
Minorities Activity 72060821RFA00001”. 

Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on 
www.grants.gov, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack 
of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. Please check www.grants.gov 
for any amendments. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

3. Applicants responsiveness: 
All applications received by the closing date and time will be reviewed for responsiveness 
to the specifications outlined in these guidelines and the application format. Section E: 
Application Review Information addresses technical merit review criteria. Applicants must 
review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may lead 
to the disqualification of an application. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that 
all necessary documentation is complete and received on time. 

The application received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness 
to the NOFO and the application format. No addition or modifications will be accepted 
after the submission date. PDF documents are the preferred file format, though MS Word 
documents will be accepted, if necessary. 

4. Content and Form of Application Submission: 
In accordance with 5 CFR 1320, which implements the Paperwork Reduction Act, USAID 
requires an electronic submission of the application. 

The Application must be submitted as two separate documents: 

(a) Technical Application (with attachments); and 
(b) Cost/Business Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. 
Please see subsections 6 and 7, below, for information on the content specific to the 
Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address 
technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and 
address risk and other related issues. 

Both the Technical and Business Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

● 
Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● 
Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address); 
● 
Activity name; 
● 
Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 
● 
Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships if applicable (identify if 
any of the organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of 
‘local entity’ under ADS 303.) 
Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing 
the application. The Application signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

accompanied by evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been 
previously furnished to the issuing office. 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will 
serve only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be 
reviewed as part of the merit review criteria. 

Applications must comply with the following: 

● 
USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the 
subsequent sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page 
limitations. 
● 
Written in English. 
● 
Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman 
font, 1” margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including 
consecutive page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 
A 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply 
with the 12-point Times New Roman requirement. 
● 
Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● 
The estimated start date identified in Section B of this RFA must be used in the cost 
application. 
● 
The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format 
as appropriate. 
● 
The Cost/Business must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and 
no hidden formulas or sheets and a budget narrative in PDF format. A PDF version 
of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to the Excel version at the 
applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application submission is the 
unlocked Excel version. 
5. Application Submission Procedures 
The Application must be submitted electronically to Salya Yacoubi, 
syacoubi@usaid.gov, with a cc: to usaidmoroccocontracts@usaid.gov. The deadline for 
Full Application submission is Monday, March 22, 2021 at 12pm noon (Morocco Time) 

The Complete application received by the submission deadline will be reviewed by a 
Selection Committee. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary 
documentation is complete and received on time. Applications received after the 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

deadline or which do not adhere to the required format will be deemed non-
responsive and will not be reviewed. 

After you have sent your application electronically, immediately check your own email 
outbox to confirm that the attachments you intended to send were indeed sent. If you 
discover an error in your transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject 
line of the email or indicate in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a 
"corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless there has been 
a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. The applicant should retain 
for their records one (1) copy of the application and all enclosures which accompany it. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion 
processes associated with electronic submissions. 

If it is necessary to send an application in multiple emails, please indicate in the subject 
line of the email whether the email relates to the Technical or Business Application, and 
the desired sequence of multiple emails (if more than one is sent) and of attachments (e.g. 
"No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your Business Application is being sent in two emails, 
the first email should have a subject line which says: "Organization Name – Religious and 
Ethnic Minorities NOFO 72060821RFA00001 – Business Application, Part 1 of 2". 

Our preference is that the Technical Application and the Business Application each be 
submitted as single email attachments. 

USAID will send confirmation emails when the electronic files are successfully received. 
If no email confirmation has been provided, then the electronic materials were not received. 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of 
several hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to 
send the application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial 
point of entry to the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Morocco cannot 
guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. 

6. Technical Application Format 
The Technical Application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection 
for award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The technical application should be 
specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application must demonstrate the 
applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this program. 
The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit review 
criteria found in this RFA. 

The Technical Narrative portion of the Application (sections e) through g) below) 
shall not exceed 25 pages (excluding the authorized annexes). The application must be 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

written in English, using Microsoft Word, Times New Roman, 12-point font on standard 8 
1/2" x 11" paper (210 mm by 297mm paper), single spaced, each page numbered 
consecutively, and no less than 1” margins on all sides. Footnotes, charts, and tables will 
be included in the page limit requirement. A 10-point font can be used for graphs and 
charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 12-point Times New Roman requirement. 

The cover page, table of contents, acronyms list, executive summary, and annexes are not 
subject to the above page limitation. Anything beyond 25 pages will NOT be read or 
evaluated. 

The format of the technical application must follow the outline and order specified below. 

a) Cover Page (1 page): (not included in page limitations) 
Please see instructions in subsection 4 above for the information to include in the 
cover page. 

b) Table of Contents (not included in page limitations) 
This page shall list all sections of the Technical Application with page numbers and 
attachments. 

c) Acronyms List (not included in page limitations) 
This page shall include the list of acronyms used in the Technical Application. 

d) Executive Summary: (not included in page limitations; must not exceed 2 
pages) 
Please provide a concise summary of the Applicant’s program description, program 
methodology, and expected results. 

e) Technical Approach 
The Technical Approach Section should include information sufficient to evaluate 
the application under the Technical Approach Criterion. 

The Technical Approach Section should include a clear description of the overall 
objectives, the results to be achieved, the resources and steps required to meet them 
in an identifiable period of time, and benchmark measures of progress towards 
achievement by addressing the following: 

i. Contextual Analysis: Identify the impediments to understanding as they 
relate to the Applicant’s proposed activities, and should include an assessment 
of gender dynamics as applicable. The application will describe the specific 
communities to be engaged and the historical, cultural and social importance 
of the issue, event or site around which programming will be built. 
ii. Program Hypothesis Explain the programmatic logic at the activity level that 
underlies and informs the programmatic approach taken in the application. 
The program hypothesis will describe the anticipated causal link between the 
proposed activities and their intended impact on the problems identified in the 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

context analysis. Programs are generally stronger when they have a single 
or few complementary clear and focused program hypotheses that guide their 
overall implementation and that address specific elements of the social 
dynamics. Applicants must provide a succinct program hypothesis that does 
not exceed five lines. 

iii. Activities: Provide a detailed description of proposed activities, target 
audiences and expected results. Proposed interventions will employ an 
approach that increases broad support for preserving Morocco’s shared 
pluralistic heritage in order to reach common goals or solve shared issues. 
Activities will not focus solely on minority groups, but rather seek to engage 
other elements of Moroccan society. Applicants must describe what activities 
will contribute to achieving the programmatic goals as described in the 
program hypothesis. 
iv. Sustainability: USAID seeks applications that demonstrate impact that lasts 
beyond the life of the program. In addition, proposed activities must promote, 
strengthen and be supported by sustainable local organizations that champion 
sound concepts, innovative practices and changes beyond the life of the award 
through targeting key people and seeking social and institutional change. 
USAID encourages supporting local organizations and working with new 
partners to build their capacity to manage U.S. Government awards. 
The “Technical Approach” will form the basis of the “Program Description” that 
will be incorporated into any eventual cooperative agreement. Therefore, the 
applicant must write the Technical Approach from the perspective of the 
agreement; that, the Technical Approach will say things such as, “REMA will…” 
or “[organization name] will..., as opposed to “we will…” (i.e., do not use “we” in 
the Technical Approach). 
In addition to the information authorized in this Section, the following annexes are 
authorized: 

⮚ 
Draft First-year Implementation Plan; and 
⮚ 
Draft Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan. 

Please refer to the annexes section h below for additional information. 

f) Management Approach and Staffing Plan 
The Management Approach and Staffing Plan Section should include information 
sufficient to properly evaluate the application under the Management Approach and 
Staffing Plan Criterion. 

This section should describe organizational structure(s) and how individual 
projects/activities will be managed and staffed. This should include detail about 
both administrative and technical aspects of the management approach, as well as 
the specific role(s) of each organization contributing to the proposed activities. 

The proposed staffing plan should be in line with and adequate to the technical and 
management approaches proposed by the applicant. The plan should include 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

proposed key personnel roles and responsibilities with a description of their specific 
duties and qualifications. It should also include non-key personnel that will be part 
of the team. 

The Key Personnel positions and basic expectations for each position under this 
Award are provided below. 

Chief of Party (COP): Estimated Level of Effort: full-time employee 
Description: 

● 
The COP will serve as the main point of contact for USAID for the REMA 
Activity in Morocco, responsible for accomplishing the major goals and 
objectives of the project. 
● 
The COP provides vision, leadership, direction, guidance, management, and 
oversight of the programmatic operations and implementing team of 
national and international staff, consultants, and volunteers. 
● 
The COP represents REMA in Morocco with all partners, regulatory bodies, 
other agencies, community and civic organizations, donors and supporters, 
visitors, and the general public. The COP keenly understands the collective 
past and present experiences of religious and ethnic minority groups in 
Morocco, and as such oversees the participatory design and implementation 
of REMA to be entirely respectful of their traditions and to promote an 
environment that invites sincere and enduring collaboration. 
● 
S/he will serve as the Contractor’s primary representative for all agreement-
related issues, concerns, or problems. 
Required Qualifications: 

● 
Master’s Degree (or higher) in an appropriate interdisciplinary subject such 
as economics, education, management, business administration or related 
fields with a minimum of eight (8) years of managerial and operational 
experience or a Bachelor’s Degree with a minimum of twelve (12) years of 
relevant experience is highly desired; 
● 
Business proficiency, written and spoken, in English and French (Arabic is 
a plus). Professional working proficiency (Level 3) as defined by the 
International Language Roundtable (http://www.govtilr.org/) is acceptable. 
Full professional proficiency (Level 4) is preferred; 
● 
Demonstrated experience in managing programs with a technical scope 
similar to the RFA; 
● 
Track record of successfully implementing large-scale development and 
interfaith projects to completion, particularly involving Muslim, Jewish, 
and Christian communities; 
● 
Close familiarity with the requirements of data gathering procedures that 
integrate local citizens and residents and their interactive dialogue in order 
to develop oral histories; 
● 
Experience in supporting the creation of narrative presentations of cultural 
history in different formats, securing cultural preservation and public 
access, and designing and facilitating engaging workshops for the diversity 
of Moroccan society; 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

● 
A keen understanding based on experience of Moroccan public 
administrative systems and the process of securing partnership agreements 
and activity authorizations at the different administrative tiers; 
● 
Extensive experience in public speaking -in English, as well as in Arabic 
or French -in diverse forums, such as with youth and at education centers 
that service people of all ages, public policy and government 
representatives, multicultural settings, and with business community and 
civil society members; 
● 
A willingness to travel and visit community groups and project areas in 
different parts of Morocco, and internationally as needed to share the 
REMA experience at conferences and with government officials and among 
others with the intent to promote partnerships and replication. 
Program Coordinator/Deputy Chief of Party (D/COP): Estimated Level of 
Effort: full-time employee 
Description: 

● 
The Program coordinator will act as a deputy to the Chief of Party, 
supporting the COP in the provision of leadership and oversight. 
● 
S/he will provide technical and contractual management to the USAID-
funded Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) in Morocco, 
ensuring that proposed interventions are planned and executed with quality, 
accountability, and measurable impact. 
● 
Sh/e will also engage in various community and external relations and will 
coordinate activities that result in enhanced visibility of the program on the 
local, national, and international levels. 
● 
Other key responsibilities include: oversee program reporting and 
monitoring; quality control and compliance; maintain cooperative 
relationships with local partners and beneficiary community 
representatives; ensure effective program finance and administration; and 
supervise and mentor program staff as appropriate. 
Required Qualifications: 

● 
Master’s Degree in International Development, Social Sciences, 
Management, or other relevant field; or a Bachelor’s degree in a relevant 
field and 5 additional years of relevant experience, is desired; 
● 
A minimum of 5 years of relevant work experience, particularly in program 
management, monitoring and evaluation, external relations, sustainable 
development, and/or culture-and faith-based programs is desired; 
● 
Excellent written and interpersonal communication, with the ability to craft 
messaging according to audience; 
● 
Willingness to travel extensively to project sites for purposes of planning, 
monitoring, implementation, and visibility; 
● 
At least two years of experience living and working in Morocco with an 
understanding of local work culture and methods of mobilizing 
communities; 
● 
Business proficiency, written and spoken, in English, knowledge of Arabic 
(especially the Moroccan dialect/Darija), working knowledge of French is 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

helpful. Professional working proficiency (Level 3) as defined by the 
International Language Roundtable (http://www.govtilr.org/) is acceptable. 
Full professional proficiency (Level 4) is preferred. 

In addition to the information authorized in this Section, the following annexes are 
authorized: 

⮚ 
Organizational Chart; and 
⮚ 
Resumes and letters of commitment for the key personnel positions. 

Please refer to the annexes section h below for additional information. 

g) Organizational Capacity and Past Performance 
The Organizational Capacity and Past Performance Section should include 
information sufficient to evaluate the application under the Organizational Capacity 
and Past performance criterion. 

The Applicant must demonstrate technical resources and expertise. The Applicant 
must make sure that at least three (3) Past Performance Questionnaires are 
submitted by the referees (Please use the template in annex 4) for itself and for each 
major sub-awardee (if applicable) for relevant projects or awards for which the 
Applicant has served as the prime implementer in the past 5 years. If the Applicant 
has not served as the prime implementer for a relevant project/award in the past 5 
years, the Applicant may submit the PPI form for any relevant projects/awards on 
which the Applicant has served as a subawardee/subcontractor in the past 5 years 
(please note this clearly on the submission). 

In addition, an annex should be provided that contains reference information for the 
applicant and any proposed major sub-awardee. 

Please refer to the annexes section h below for additional information. 

h) Annexes (not included in page limitations; be concise, includes supporting 
information for the technical narrative, as needed) 
In addition to the 25 page Technical Application, the following annexes are 
required. No additional annexes and other supporting documentation will be 
reviewed and evaluated. 
⮚Draft First-year Implementation Plan (Annex 1): The applicant must propose a 
draft implementation plan and timeline that will allow for rapid initiation of the 
proposed projects, activities, and partnerships. The Draft First-year Implementation 
Plan inputs, outputs, and measurable outcomes should be realistic and achievable 
within the proposed budget and timeframe and reflect a grasp of the necessary steps 
to ensure efficient, effective execution of project activities. 

⮚Draft Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (Annex 2): The Applicant is 
required to include a draft Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

covering the life-of-activity, which describes how the Applicant will measure the 
achievement of results. The Draft MEL Plan must describe how it will measure the 
impact and track progress towards achievement of the component’s results and 
include a description of the methodology for gathering and analyzing baseline data 
and for gathering outcome data or impact/results during each year of activity 
implementation. The Draft MEL Plan must identify the specific indicators used to 
measure output, outcome and impact per the results outlined above. The Draft MEL 
Plan must demonstrate how activities will have an integrated, gender aware 
approach and how proposed indicators will be used for timely management 
decisions and credibly reflect the actual performance of the activity. 

⮚Draft List of Partners and Letters of Commitment (Annex 3): The applicant is 
required, if applicable to include a list of all partners (if applicable) who it expects 
to contribute to its implementation of the Activity. The list should include 

● 
The legal name of the entity; 
● 
What type of organization it is (e.g. non-profit, for profit company, 
educational institution, religious organization etc.); 
● 
A brief summary of its capabilities relevant to its role in the implementation 
of the Activity. 
This annex should also include letters that demonstrate a firm, specific commitment 
of the referenced organization to participate in the program. 

⮚Organization Chart (Annex 4): The Applicant is required to include an 
organizational chart. The chart should present in a clear manner the detailed 
proposed organization structure of its personnel and partners, as well as the location 
and organization of any field offices. It should also show the proposed organization 
for the Program; this chart should include, but is not limited to, a representation of 
the staff reporting lines and relationships between the different positions that fully 
illustrates the management structure of both full time and non-full time staff for the 
Recipient and all subrecipients; it should be sufficient to illustrate the complete 
human resources needs necessary to achieve the objectives of this Program. 

⮚Resumes/CVs & Letters of Commitment (Annex 5): This annex should include 
a complete and current resume/CV for each key personnel position, detailing the 
requisite qualifications and experience of the individual and references with contact 
information. Resumes/CVs may not exceed two (2) pages in length. Qualifications, 
experience and skills shall be placed in chronological order starting with most 
recent information. Each resume/CV shall be accompanied with a commitment 
letter from each candidate indicating his or her: (a) availability to serve in the stated 
position, in terms of days after the award; (b) intention to serve for the stated term 
of service; and (c) agreement to the compensation levels which correspond to the 
levels set forth in the cost application. Each resume/CV shall include a minimum 
of three (3) references of professional contacts (current phone, e-mail address 
information for each reference contact) within the last five years; with complete 
current contact information, including email addresses and telephone numbers, for 
each proposed key personnel candidate. The applicant must request that referees 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

send references directly to USAID/Morocco to the email address specified for 
receipt of applicants in Section D of this NOFO. The references provided must 
speak to the candidates ability to succeed in the proposed key personnel position. 

⮚Reference Information (Annex 6): The Applicant is authorized to include 
reference information for up to three (3) projects/activities for itself and for each 
major sub-awardee (if applicable). This annex should consist of the completed 
“Past Performance Questionnaire Template” in Annex 4 to this NOFO for every 
reference. The applicant must request that referees send the following information 
directly to USAID using the format provided in Annex 4 Past Performance 
Questionnaire. Please see below for more details. 

The applicant must request that referees send the following information directly to 
USAID using the format provided in Annex 4 Past Performance Questionnaire: 

•Name of applicant requesting the reference; 
Scope of work or complexity/diversity of tasks completed; 
• Primary location(s) of work; 
•Period of performance; 
• Dollar value; and 
• Contract type, i.e., fixed-price, cost reimbursement, etc. 
• Performance information regarding quality, cost control, schedule, management 
and regulatory compliance, in accordance with the evaluation subfactor. 
The information must be sent to the email address specified for receipt of 
applications in Section D of this NOFO, in advance of the application submission 
date and time. Please note that it is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that 
USAID/Morocco receives the requested information. 

Additionally, the applicant must describe the relevance of the referenced awards in 
its applications. 

Finally, the applicant must include the name of the Contracting/Agreement 
Officer’s Representative and Alternate Contracting/Agreement Officer’s 
Representative for each referenced award, if applicable. 

USAID/Morocco reserves the right to verify the experience and past performance 
record of cited projects or other recent projects/activities by reviewing performance 
reports, or to interview cited references or other persons knowledgeable of the 
Applicant’s performance on a particular project. 

The Agreement Officer may also consult other resources and references not 
provided by the applicant related to the applicant’s past performance. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

7. Business (Cost) Application Format 
The Cost or Business Application portion of the Full Application shall be submitted 
separately from the Technical Application. While there is no page limit for this portion of 
the application, the Applicant is encouraged to be as concise as possible, but still provide 
the necessary details. 

The business (cost) application must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the 
budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

Prior to award, the applicant may be required to submit additional documentation deemed 
necessary for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 
CFR 200.205. 

The Applicant should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

The Business Application must contain the following sections: 

a) Cover Page (Please see instructions in subsection 4 above for the information to 
include in the cover page.) 
b) SF 424 Form(s) 
The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series at 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

(1) SF-424 -Application for Federal Assistance; 
(2) SF-424A -Budget Information – Non-Construction Programs; 
(3) SF-424B -Assurances – Non-Construction Programs; and 
c) Required Certifications and Assurances 
The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy 
with their application: “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other 
Statements of the Recipient” document found at: 

http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 

d) Summary Budget: inclusive of all Activity costs broken out by major budget 
category and by fiscal year for interventions to be implemented by the Applicant 
and any potential sub-recipients for the entire period of the Activity. See Annex 5 
for Summary Budget Template. 
e) Budget and Budget Narrative 
The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to 
understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted costs 
address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and 
Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to 
support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

The budget includes : 

1. a budget with a breakdown by activity year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent an efficient use of funding to implement the 
Applicant’s activity. 
2. a detailed budget for each sub-recipient, broken out by budget category and by 
year, for the entire implementation period of the Activity with an accompanying 
budget narrative which provides, in detail, the total costs for implementation of 
the Activity. 
The applicant shall include a budget with an accompanying budget narrative which 
provides, in detail, the total costs for implementation of the Activity. 

a. The budget must be submitted in US dollars, in Excel format using 
the provided template in Annex 5 with unlocked cells to enable USAID to 
check the formulas and calculations included. All cells that are derivative 
calculations from other information submitted on the budget template must 
be calculated in the cell from the relevant equation and cannot be submitted 
as just a final value. 
b. The following major line items with a budget narrative must be 
included. Each major line item must be supported by detailed breakdowns 
of each expected sub-expense under that line: 
i. Personnel : Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation -Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include 
position title, salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for 
each position. A detailed level of effort estimate must be included for 3 key 
personnel. Other non-key personnel costs should be estimated based on the 
estimated number of full-and part-time staff needed to successfully enable 
the Applicant to meet their technical scope of work. Allowances, when 
proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by position. The 
applicant must explain all assumptions in the budget narrative. The budget 
narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable 
for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work 
in other activities of the Applicant. The Applicant must provide their 
established written policies on personnel compensation. If the Applicant’s 
written policies do not address a specific element of compensation that is 
being proposed, the budget narrative must describe the rationale used and 
supporting market research. 
ii. Fringe Benefits: (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit 
rate approved by an agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use 
such rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an Applicant does not have 
a fringe benefit rate approved, the Applicant must propose a rate and explain 
how the Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the budget narrative 
must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits 
(e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. 
dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

iii. Travel and Transportation: The application should provide 
details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of trips, the origin and 
destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide supporting 
documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain 
assumptions in the budget narrative. 
iv. Supplies: The application should specify the procurement of all 
tangible personal property other than those described in Equipment. A 
computing device is a supply if the acquisition cost is less than the lesser of 
the capitalization level established by the non-Federal entity for financial 
statement purposes or $5,000, regardless of the length of its useful life. The 
application should indicate the quantity of the equipment to be purchased, 
the unit cost and the total price. 
v. Equipment: The application should specify the procurement of any 
tangible personal property (including information technology systems) 
having a useful life of more than one year and a per-unit acquisition cost 
which equals or exceeds the lesser of the capitalization level established by 
the non-Federal entity for financial statement purposes, or $5,000. The 
application should indicate the quantity of the equipment to be purchased, 
the unit cost and the total price. 
vi. Other Direct Costs: The application should provide a breakdown 
of all anticipated other direct costs (i.e. the amount, type, and unit cost with 
as much detail as possible) not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, 
as well as any other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program 
proposed by the applicant. The applicant should also indicate the subject, 
venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their 
relationship to the objectives of the program along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 
vii. Subawards: (If applicable) The application should specify the 
budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the 
subtier entity is a subrecipient and any identified consortium partners or 
contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect 
costs. 
viii. Construction: Detail of all construction costs related to the 
rehabilitation, if applicable. Any construction costs must be budgeted 
separately and included as a separate budget category. Each construction 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

intervention (i.e., site) must have a separate budget within this category. If 
construction is included, the total amount budget should not exceed 
$100,000 (USD). 

ix. Total Direct Costs 
x. Indirect Costs -The application should indicate whether the 
applicant is proposing indirect costs or will charge all costs directly. In 
order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 
200.414. The application must identify which approach they are requesting 
and provide the applicable supporting information. Below are the most 
commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 
Method 1 -Direct Charge Only 
Eligibility: Any applicant 
Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs. 

Method 2 -Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 
Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use 
that NICRA. 
Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, 
submit your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If 
your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the 
contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the 
Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject 
to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non 
Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

Method 3 -De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 
Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA. 
Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as 
either indirect or direct costs, but may not be double charged or 
inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology, once elected, 
must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-
Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal 
entity may apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost 
elements it charges indirectly versus directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for 
further information. 

Method 4 -Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 
Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may 
request this method, but approval is at the discretion of the AO 
Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a 
worksheet that includes the following: 

● 
Total 
costs 
incurred by the 
organization for 
the 
previous 
fiscal 
year 
and 
estimates for the current year. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

●Indirectcosts(common coststhatbenefittheday-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of 
executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit 
and are identifiable to more than one program or activity, such as 
depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and 
telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 
● 
Proposed method for 
prorating the 
indirect 
costs 
equitably and 
consistently across all programs and activities of using a base that measures 
the benefits of that particular cost to each program or activity to which the 
cost applies. 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to 
utilize the 10% de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further 
instructions and may request additional supporting information, including 
financial statements and audits, should the application still be under 
consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to 
approve the applicant’s requested method. 

xi. TOTAL COSTS 
Note: The Agreement Officer (AO) may request additional detailed budget 
information, particularly for responsibility determination, following notification to 
an Applicant that it is under consideration for an award. If necessary, the AO may 
verify cost data, evaluate specific elements of costs, and examine data to determine 
the necessity, reasonableness and allocability of the costs reflected in the budget 
and their allowability pursuant to the applicable cost principles. The AO may 
require other information to determine responsibility and cost efficiency. 

f) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 
Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any 
requirements for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the 
award to reflect approval of any cost elements for which prior written approval is 
specifically required for allowability, the applicant must specify and justify that 
cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require 
prior written approval. 

g) Approval of Subawards 
The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have 
approved at the time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must 
provide the following: 

●Name of organization 
●DUNS 
Number 
● 
Confirmation that 
the 
subrecipient 
does 
not 
appear 
on the 
Treasury 
Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

●Confirmation thatthesubrecipientdoesnothaveactiveexclusionsin theSystem 
for Award Management (SAM) 

● 
Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security 
designation list 
●Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● 
Confirmation that 
the 
applicant 
has 
completed a 
risk assessment 
of 
the 
subrecipient, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 

●Any negative findingsasaresultofthe risk assessmentand theapplicant’splan 
for mitigation. 

h) Unique Entity Identifier Dun and Bradstreet and System for Award 
Management Requirements 
USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all 
applicable unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award 
Management (SAM) requirements. The applicant is required to: 

i.Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining 
processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and 
consolidating hosting to make the process of doing business with the 
government more efficient (www.sam.gov); 
ii. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-
recipients; and 
iii.Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information 
at all times during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan 
under consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 
i) Potential Request for Additional Documentation 
Upon consideration of Award or during the negotiations leading to an Award, the 
Applicant may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. 
The Applicant should not submit the information below with their application! The 
information in this section is provided so that the Applicant may become familiar 
with additional documentation that may be requested by the Agreement Officer. 

The information submitted should substantiate: 

1. Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable. 
2. Whether the organizational travel, procurement, financial management, 
accounting manual and personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding 
salary, promotion, leave, differentials, etc., submitted under this section have been 
reviewed and approved by any agency of the Federal Government, and if so, 
provide the name, address, and phone number of the cognizant reviewing official. 
The Applicant should provide copies of the same. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

j) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 
The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy 
and Marking Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and 
incorporated into any resulting award (Please use the template in Annex 2) 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 
a. The Applicant recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate 
a "Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named 
and positioned, and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and 
host country citizens. 
b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the 
applicant, confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment 
to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame 
specified by the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and 
marking USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, 
materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are 
subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be 
incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement 
or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1)All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, 
such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 
(2)The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 
(i)USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found 
on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the 
RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii)USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii)It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant 
must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

(v)USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. 
Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, 
including direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4)Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the 
program to beneficiaries. 
(i)Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii)Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project 
to host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, 
and so forth. 
The Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “ from the 
American People.” 

(iv)Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 
(5) Information on any direct involvement from the host-country government or 
ministry, including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 
(6)Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program 
materials and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be 
visibly acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 
e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 
f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be 
included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 
(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 
a. The Applicant recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate 
a “Marking Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials, and other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which 
comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency, and is found 
on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding 

Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of 
an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an 
award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified 
by the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and 
marking USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, 
materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are 
subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be 
incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement 
or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials that the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID 
Identity as part of the award, including: 
(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature; 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by 
USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or 
disaster relief programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(v)Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the 
USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise 
acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 
(2)A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 
(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID 
Identity; 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the 
program deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program 
deliverables, and where the applicant will place the marking; 
(iv)What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity , and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 
(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an 
explanation of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an 
exemption if USAID marking requirements would: 
(i)Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and 
materials. The applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim 
Result, or program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an 
aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable 
item, examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The 
applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, 
public service announcements, or other communications. The applicant must 
explain why each particular item or product is better positioned as host-country 
government item or product. 
(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking 
the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why 
marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The 
applicant must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate 
that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 
(vii)Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 
f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and 
reasonableness and will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The 
Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the above information is adequately 
included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any 
approved exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or 
cooperative agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided 
otherwise. 
(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

k) Funding Restrictions 
USAID policy is not to award profit under assistance instruments. However, all 
reasonable, allocable and allowable expenses, both direct and indirect, which are 
related to the agreement program and are in accordance with applicable cost 
principle under 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. of the Uniform Administrative 
Requirements may be paid under the anticipated award. 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities 
and services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the 
authorized geographic code specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet 
the source and nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. The Applicant 
should address any issues with these funding restrictions in this Section of the 
Business (Cost) Application. 

Significant changes to the budget post-award, such as a request for additional 
funding, a request to raise the total obligation/award ceiling or a request to modify 
the award budget to more closely align with expected expenditures, will require 
prior approval. 

l) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 

a.Personal Conflict of Interest 
1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant 
organization or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an 
Agency official involved in the competitive award decision-making process 
that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of 
interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal 
considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, 
the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits 
an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest 
after submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of 
interest to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 
The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that 
they are aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive 
advantage in competing for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair 
competitive advantage include but are not limited to situations in which an 
applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to nonpublic information 
regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s 
employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving 
any such notification from the applicant. 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

[END OF SECTION D] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

1. Criteria 
The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. The Applicant should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant 
matters which the applicant should address in the application, and (b) set the standard 
against which the application will be evaluated. 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be 
evaluated by a Selection Committee (SC) using the ratings described in this section. 

2. Review and Selection Process 
a) Rating 
USAID will conduct a merit review of the application received that comply with 
the instructions in this NOFO. The application will be reviewed and evaluated using 
an adjectival rating system (Exceptional, Very Good, Satisfactory, Marginal, 
Unsatisfactory) in accordance with the following criteria, listed in descending order 
of Importance: 

Adjective Merit Review Criterion 
Exceptional An Exceptional application has the following characteristics: 
• A comprehensive and thorough application of exceptional merit. 
• Application meets and fully exceeds the Government expectations or 
exceeds NFO objectives and presents very low risk or no overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful performance. 
• Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that may exist. 
Very Good A Very Good application has the following characteristics: 
• An application demonstrating a strong grasp of the objectives. 
• Application meets NOFO objectives and presents a low overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
• Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that exist. 
Satisfactory A Satisfactory application has the following characteristics: 
• An application demonstrating a reasonably sound response and a 
good grasp of the objectives. 
• Application meets NOFO objectives and presents a moderate overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
• Strengths outweigh weaknesses. 
Marginal A Marginal application has the following characteristics: 
• The application shows a limited understanding of the objectives. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

• Application meets some or most of the NOFO objectives, but 
presents a significant overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 
• Weaknesses equal or outweigh any strength that exists. 
Unsatisfactory An Unsatisfactory application has the following characteristics: 
• The Application does not meet the NOFO objectives or requires a 
major rewrite of the application. 
• Present an unacceptable degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 
• Weaknesses demonstrate a lack of understanding of the 
Government’s needs. 
• Weaknesses significantly outweigh any strength that exists. 

b) Merit Review Criteria 
The technical applications will be reviewed in accordance with the three (3) review criteria 
set forth below. The table below outlines the evaluation criteria which include: 

(1)Technical Approach 
(2)Management Approach and Staffing 
(3)Organizational Capacity and Past Performance 
The criteria are listed in descending order of importance: 
1 Criterion Name Technical Approach Importance 1 
2 Criterion Name Management Approach & Staffing Plan Importance 2 
3 Criterion Name Organizational Capacity & Past 
Performance 
Importance 3 

Criterion 1: Technical Approach 

The Technical Approach Criterion will be evaluated in terms of overall quality as follows (the 
following are not subcriteria; rather they are aspects that will be considered when evaluating 
the Technical Approach): 

● 
Extent to which the technical approach demonstrates a clear understanding of Religious 
and Ethnic Minorities; 
● 
Extent to which the technical approach is comprehensive, demonstrates an understanding 
of the technical and contextual challenges, can realistically achieve the stated objectives 
and expected results in the program description, integrates gender considerations, and 
utilizes appropriate local partners to ensure feasibility and sustainability; 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

● 
Extent to which the proposed draft First-year implementation plan is clear and reasonable 
for the proposed projects and activities and the extent it demonstrates a rapid, yet realistic, 
launch and initiation of activities; 
● 
Extent to which the proposed Draft Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan is 
sound, effective, and efficient. 
Criterion 2. Management Approach and Staffing Plan: 

The Management Approach and Staffing Plan Criterion will be evaluated for its effectiveness 
to successfully implement activities and to achieve Activity objectives and the quality, clarity 
and responsiveness of the Applicant’s overall Management Approach, including the 
subcontractors and home office technical support. This includes the following considerations 
(the following are not subcriteria; rather they are aspects that will be considered when 
evaluating the Management Approach and Staffing): 

● 
Extent to which the management structure is clear, is consistent with the Activity objectives 
and results, including the extent to which the proposed organizational structure, roles of 
the team, staffing and partnerships maximize flexibility and adaptive management; 
● 
Effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed overall Staffing Plan, such that personnel 
possess the full range of complementary experience, skill, and expertise required to 
successfully implement the necessary technical and managerial tasks required to 
implement the Activity, as well as the extent to which the Staffing Plan maximizes the use 
of local resources; 
● 
Extent to which the staffing plan effectively maximizes the use of locally-resident 
Moroccan expertise; and 
● 
Extent to which Key Personnel possess relevant and demonstrated qualifications, 
experience, performance and skills applicable to the roles/positions being proposed. 
Criterion 3. Organizational Capacity and Past Performance: 

The Organizational Capacity and Past Performance Criterion will be evaluated on the existing 
capacity of the Applicant to successfully implement the specified activities and achieve desired 
results. This includes the following considerations (the following are not subcriteria; rather they 
are aspects that will be considered when evaluating the Organizational Capacity and Past 
Performance): 

● 
Institutional capacity and past performance records for both Applicant and its proposed 
subawardees/partners will be closely reviewed and evaluated for their relevance and 
performance experience on similar projects performed within the last 3-5 years. Relevance 
is defined as projects performed of a similar scope, magnitude and scale. The Applicant 
and its partners have the technical and management experience and skills to implement the 
proposed interventions. 
● 
Past Performance information will be used for the responsibility determination. USAID 
may use performance information obtained from sources other than those identified by the 
Applicant. USAID will utilize existing databases of agreements performance information 
if any and solicit additional information from the references provided in and from other 
sources if and when the Agreement Officer finds the existing databases to be insufficient 
for evaluating an applicant’s performance. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

In cases where an Applicant lacks relevant past performance history or in which 
information on past performance is not available, the Applicant will not be evaluated 
favorably or unfavorably on past performance. In such cases the Applicant will be rated 
“neutral”. The “neutral” rating provided to these applicants is at the Agreement Officer's 
discretion based on the past performance ratings for all other applicants. Prior to assigning 
a "neutral" past performance rating, the Agreement Officer may take into account a broad 
range of information related to an applicant’s past performance. 

c) Business (Cost) Review 
The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are reasonable 
and allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

The Agency will also consider 

(1)the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial aspects of the program and the 
applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; 
(2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and 
(3)whether any special conditions relating to costs should be included in the award. 
Other considerations are the completeness of the application, adequacy of budget detail, and 
consistency with elements of the Technical Application. In addition, the organization must 
demonstrate adequate financial management capability, to be measured for a responsibility 
determination. 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a 
preaward survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the 
prospective recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational 
controls, financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to 
achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. 
Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not 
execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

[END OF SECTION E] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

1. Federal Award Notices 
Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While 
USAID/Morocco anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, the potential 
applicant is hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the 
expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred 
before receipt of either a fully executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the 
Agreement Officer. 

The Cooperative Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document, which 
shall be transmitted to the Recipient for countersignature to the authorized agent of the successful 
organization(s) electronically. 

Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful applicants pursuant to ADS 

303.3.7.1.b. USAID/Morocco will consider requests for additional information pursuant to ADS 
303.3.7.2. 
2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 
No deviations are currently contemplated to the standard provisions for the Cooperative 
Agreement contemplated by this RFA. The standard provisions to be used will be the Mandatory 
Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-governmental Recipients or the Mandatory Standard Provisions 
for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Recipients. 

For U.S. organizations, the resulting federal award will be administered in accordance with the 
following policies and regulations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and ADS 303maa, Standard 
Provisions for U.S. NGOs are applicable. For complete copies of 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700, 
please also see ADS 303.4. 

For non-U.S. organizations, ADS 303mab, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. NGOs will apply. 

This NOFO only contains provisions that are required at this stage. Final provisions will be 
incorporated in the final award as applicable to the selected Recipient. 

3. Reporting Requirements 
Program Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

All written documentation must be submitted in professional-level English. The reports listed 
below are the initial reports required by the recipient. Based on the evolving nature of the 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

agreement, USAID may provide modified reporting requirements. 

Note: USAID’s fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30. Four fiscal quarterly 
periods begin on October 1, January 1, April 1, and July 1. 

a. Financial Reporting: 
Financial Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

Quarterly Financial Report: Quarterly Financial Reports shall be due within 30 days following the 
end of each quarter corresponding to USAID’s fiscal year from October 1 through September 30. 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.327, Standard Form 425 (SF-425) and SF-425A (available at 
http://whitehouse.gov/omb/grants_forms/) are used to report accrued expenditures. Reporting 
periods are calendar quarters. Quarterly financial reports are due no later than 30 days after the 
end of each calendar quarter (January 30, April 30, July 30, and October 30). 

Quarterly Accruals Reporting: Accruals are the estimated cost of the liability recognized during 
the period for goods and/or services received but not disbursed, or goods and/or services invoiced 
but not recorded. 

USAID performs a quarterly accrual exercise at the end of each quarter; i.e. December 31, March 
31, June 30, and September 30. The Recipient is expected to submit four quarterly accrual 
expenditures reports 15 days before the end of a quarter per year. The Recipient must submit a 
spreadsheet showing cumulative disbursements and estimated (un-disbursed) accruals to the AOR. 

Final Financial Report: The Final Financial Report shall be due within 90 days following the 
expiration of the award. Financial Reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700. USAID requires 
recipients to use the Standard Form 425 or Standard Form 425a, Federal Financial Report, or such 
other forms authorized for obtaining financial information as may be approved by OMB. 

Financial reports shall be submitted as follows: Financial Analyst, Office of Financial 
Management (email: RabatFM@usaid.gov) and the AOR. 

Foreign Tax Reports: Reporting of foreign taxes under this agreement shall follow the standard 
provision entitled “Reporting Host Government Taxes (December 2014)” of this award document. 

Host government taxes are not allowable where the Agreement Officer provides the necessary 
means to the recipient to obtain an exemption or refund of such taxes, and the recipient fails to 
take reasonable steps to obtain such exemption or refund. Otherwise, taxes are allowable in 
accordance with the Standard Provision, “Applicability of 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 (December 
2014),” and must be reported as required in this provision. 
The Recipient must include this reporting requirement in all applicable sub-agreements, including 
subawards and contracts. 

b. Performance Reporting and Plan Requirements: 
The Recipient shall be responsible to USAID/Morocco for all matters related to the execution of 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

the agreement. Specifically, the Recipient shall report to the Agreement Officer (AO) and to the 
Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), who will be designated by the AO prior to award. 

The Recipient will be expected to provide the following reports. All approved quarterly, annual 
reports, implementation plans, MEL plans, and technical reports shall be posted to the 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) as appropriate. 

All reports listed below shall be submitted by the specified due dates for approval by the USAID 
AOR unless otherwise agreed upon with the AOR. Recipients will consult the AOR on the format 
and expected content of reports prior to submission. The Recipient should always be ready for 
revision in program indicators and reporting requirements. 

TYPE OF REPORT DUE DATE (Counted 
from Effective Award 
Date) 
DISTRIBUTION 
Quarterly Performance Within 30 calendar days AOR or A/AOR. 
Reports after the end of each quarter. Acceptance will be provided 
[English and a summary in writing after AOR review 
in French and/or in and revisions made by 
Arabic, soft copy] Recipient. 
Annual Implementation Within 60 calendar days of AOR or A/AOR. 
Plan the date of award. By 
September 15 of each 
subsequent year. 
[English and French, soft 
copy] 
Approval will be provided in 
writing after AOR review and 
revisions made by Recipient. 
Grants Manual Within 90 calendar days of 
the date of the award 
[English, soft copy] 
AOR or A/AOR and AO 
Trafficking In Persons 
Compliance Plan 
Within 90 calendar days of 
the date of award. 
[English, soft copy] 
AO and AOR. 
Approved, in writing, by the 
AO. 
Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning Plan (MELP) 
A final MELP is expected to 
be submitted within 90 
calendar days of the date of 
award. Updates to the MELP 
will be submitted by October 
AOR and A/AOR. 
Approval will be provided in 
writing after AOR review and 
revisions made by Recipient. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

30 for subsequent years. 
[English, soft copy] 
GIS Reporting Quarterly: Sep 30, Dec 30, 
Mar 30, Geospatial (georeferenced) 
data will be 
submitted or updated for each 
project site. 
AOR and A/AOR 
Environmental Mitigation 
and Monitoring Plan 
(EMMP) 
Within 60 calendar days of 
the date of award. 
Updated and submitted 
minimum once per year using 
the USAID/Morocco 
template. 
[English, soft copy] 
AOR and MEO (Mission 
Environment Officer). 
Approval will be provided in 
writing after AOR and MEO 
review and revisions made by 
Recipient. 
Gender Analysis and Action 
Plan 
Within 90 calendar days of 
the date of award. 
[English, soft copy] 
AOR or A/AOR. 
Acceptance will be provided 
in writing after AOR review 
and revisions made by 
Recipient. 
Final Report 90 calendar days after 
completion of the award. 
[English and French, soft 
copy] No page limit. 
AOR, AO and DEC 
(Reference to M.21) 
AO approval after AOR 
review and approval after 
revisions made by Recipient. 
Closeout/Demobilization 
Plan 
120 calendar days prior to 
award completion date. 
Approved, in writing, by the 
AO. 
Other Reporting Submitted upon request 
[English/French/Arabic, 
soft copy] 
AOR 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

Project Fact sheet Updated and submitted 
quarterly using the 
USAID/Morocco template. 
AOR 
[English/French/Arabic] 
Highlights & Success Stories Highlights and Success 
Stories: Submitted regularly 
during the project lifetime. 
AOR 
[English] 

Reporting reference in Standard Provisions 
Reporting of Foreign Taxes The recipient must annually FMO/AOR/AO 
– Reference to RAA13. submit a report by April 16 of 
Reporting Host Government the next year. 
Taxes 
Participant Training Within 30 days after the end AOR, A/AOR and Mission R(
TEAMS) of each Federal Fiscal year 1 Initiator 
quarter. Recipient is 
responsible for submitting 
data into TEAMS directly. 
[English] 

● 
Quarterly Performance Reports: 
The Recipient will report performance progress for the program under the award and 
monitor and track indicators as reviewed and agreed to with USAID on a quarterly basis, 
by submitting a quarterly report. Quarterly performance reports will be submitted 30 
calendar days after the end of each quarter and contain the following information: 

(1)A comparison of actual accomplishments with the goals and objectives established 
for the period, including up-to-date figures for indicators identified in the Monitoring, 
Evaluation & Learning Plan (MELP). Whenever appropriate, and the output of programs 
or projects can be readily quantified, such quantitative data should be related to cost data 
for computation of unit costs. 
(2)Reasons why established goals were not met, if appropriate. 
(3)Other pertinent information including, when appropriate, analysis and explanation of 
cost overruns or high unit costs. 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

A general quarterly performance report template, in addition to the indicator reporting, 
will be provided by the AOR. The Recipient must submit via email a copy of quarterly, 
annual, and final performance reports to the AOR in accordance with 2 CFR 200.328. 
The Quarterly Performance Plan must be in English and a summary must be submitted 
in French and/or in Arabic. 

The timing, format and other instructions will be agreed by the AOR and the Recipient’s 
Key Personnel at the outset of implementation. 

● 
Annual Implementation Plan: 
Submitted annually to the AOR for approval, the first Implementation Plan, including 
activity planning and timeframe, is due 60 calendar days of the date of the award. For 
the subsequent years, the implementation plan will be submitted for approval by 
September 15 of every year. The plan shall include subcontract and sub-grants planning. 

Annual Implementation Plans are to be submitted in English and French to the AOR and 
Alternate via email. 

● 
Grants Manual: 
The Recipient shall submit a Grants Manual to the AOR and the Agreement Officer 

within 90 days of the date of the award. 

● 
Trafficking in Persons Compliance Plan: 
The Recipient must submit the compliance plan within the 90 days of the date of the 
award. Refer to Standard Provisions M.20 Trafficking in Persons (April 2016) for 
complete details. 

● 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MELP): 
The applicant will be responsible for developing and tracking activity targets, outputs 
and impact, and overall activity indicators in the application which gauge individual 
program activities and program effectiveness. Within 90 days following the award, the 
implementing partner must submit the first annual implementation plan. In addition to 
the initial implementation plan, the recipient will develop and submit a Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning Plan (MELP). The MELP must adequately track and document 
progress against activity components. The MELP also reflects the award progress over 
the life of the program and is a critical tool for planning, managing, documenting, and 
evaluating performance. The MELP will be reviewed and validated annually and revised 
if appropriate. 

The Recipient shall submit the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 
within 90 days of the date of the award to the AOR for approval. It is the AOR 
responsibility to review, collaborate on any necessary changes and finally approve the 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

MELP. An updated MELP report is due by October 30 of every year. The performance 
year is identified as October 1-September 30 of each year. 

Indicators: The applicant’s MELP shall propose illustrative indicators that are realistic, 
attainable and that will be effective as guides to management and reporting; and explain 
how the MELP will be implemented and applied as a management and evaluative tool. 
The following illustrative indicators, should be taken into consideration (at the CDCS IR 
level as well as at the REMA objective levels): 

IR 3: Community resilience strengthened 

➢ 
Number of initiatives that promote tolerance and dialogue between religious 
and ethnic groups 
➢ 
Percentage of participants reporting increased agreement with the concept 
that males and females should have equal access to social, economic, and political 
resources and opportunities 
Sub-IR 3.3: Religious and cultural tolerance initiatives promoted 

Objective 1 

➢ 
Number of documents secured and the effectiveness of their preservation 
➢ 
Number of viewers (and their gender makeup) that participate in the 
educational activities 
➢ 
Number of online viewers of the preserved documents 
➢ 
Number of public, civil, and cooperative support and partnerships that help 
maintain sustainability. 
Objective 2 

➢ 
Number of training and capacity-building activities conducted with USG 
assistance that are designed to promote the protection, participation, inclusion, and/or 
integration of REM, disaggregated by REM and non-REM communities. 
➢ 
Number of activities that promote tolerance and dialogue between religious 
and ethnic groups. 
➢ 
Number of activities that ensure that the voices of REM groups are 
represented in their communities. 
➢ 
Number of individuals reporting access to livelihood opportunities, 
disaggregated by REM and non-REM communities. 
➢ 
Number of activities that raise awareness about the priorities of REM 
communities. 
➢ 
Number of REM and non REM community meetings held. 
For each indicator, the MELP must include a Performance Indicator Reference Sheet 
which provides a precise definition, information on disaggregation, the data source, 
frequency of data collection, collection method, the party responsible for data collection, 
when baseline information will be collected, and expected annual/outyear targets. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

Indicators should be disaggregated by gender, youth age groups, urban/rural, and 
disability, as feasible. 

USAID’s website contains further background on USAID’s MEL approach as well as 
more detail on developing a MELP. A MELP template is provided below, in Annex 3. 

In line with the Agency’s recent directives on agency-wide implementation of the 
Development Information Solution (DIS), USAID/Morocco will likely transition to the 
DIS during the life of this activity, potentially in the first or second year of 
implementation. In anticipation of this transition, the Recipient should review publicly 
available information 
(https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/resources-for-partners/development-informationsolution) 
and be prepared to transition to data entry into the DIS should it be required by 
USAID in the future. 

The Recipient is responsible for oversight of the operations of the supported activities. 
The Recipient must monitor its activities under this Agreement to assure compliance with 
applicable Federal requirements and performance expectations are being achieved. 
Monitoring by the Recipient must cover each program, function, or activity. Events may 
occur between the scheduled performance reporting dates that have significant impact 
upon the supported activity. In such cases, the Recipient must immediately notify the 
AOR and the AO as soon as the following types of conditions become known: 

❖ 
Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will materially impair the 
ability to meet the objective of the award. This disclosure must include a 
statement of the action taken, or contemplated, and any assistance needed 
to resolve the situation. 

❖ 
Favorable developments which enable meeting time schedules and 
objectives sooner or at less cost than anticipated or producing more or 
different beneficial results than originally planned. Notifications must 
include a statement of actions taken and / or any assistance needed to resolve 
the situation. 

● 
GIS Reporting: 
The Implementation Plan will also apply geospatial methods using Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) technology to support USAID’s effort to incorporate 
geographic data and analysis into USAID’s overall development planning, design, and 
monitoring & evaluation. The Recipient is not expected to purchase or utilize GIS 
software unless it is relevant for implementation of their activities. The Recipient can 
utilize any of the GIS tools publicly available. When geographic data is acquired through 
data use or ownership agreements with the host-country government or other entity, the 
Recipient must ensure that the agreement makes it permissible for the geographic data to 
be submitted to, and used by, USAID and other U.S. Embassy agencies. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

● 
Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP): 
Submitted annually to the AOR and MEO for approval, the first Environmental 
Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP), is due 60 calendar days of the date of the 
award. For the following subsequent years, the Recipient shall update and submit 
minimum once per year using USAID/Morocco template. 

Refer to Section Environmental Compliance Requirement for complete details. 

● 
Gender Analysis and Action Plan: 
The Recipient shall submit a Gender Analysis and Action Plan within 90 calendar days 
of the date of the award to the AOR for approval. 

The Recipient will conduct a gender analysis that assesses context and gender gaps and 
needs, including access, time constraints and participation limitations. This analysis will 
inform a subsequent gender action plan, which will be developed in collaboration with 
USAID management team and finalized within 90 calendar days of the award. The 
gender action plan will inform the Activity’s technical approach as it relates to gender 
throughout the life of the Activity. It also will be used to inform the design of activities 
that seek to reduce opportunity gaps between men and women and or address power 
differentials to promote gender equity. The gender action plans should be developed in 
conjunction with the Activity’s monitoring, evaluation and learning plan, and progress 
should be reflected in annual work plans and performance reports. 

● 
Final Report 
The Recipient must prepare and submit the final report required by this Agreement to the 
Agreement Officer’s Representative in English and French within 90 calendar days 
after completion of the award and to the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) 
at http://dec.usaid.gov. Refer to Attachment C, Standard Provisions Section M.21 
Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications (June 
2012). 
The final performance report should contain, but not be limited to the following 
information: 

❖ 
Executive summary 

❖ 
Describe the methods of assistance used and the pros and cons of these 

methods 

❖ 
Brief description and mapping of the results of the program 

❖ 
How this program assisted USAID in meeting targets 

❖ 
Success stories 

❖ 
Problems and how they were overcome 

❖ 
Cost-effectiveness 

❖ 
Final-year (and/or final fiscal year) as well as cumulative life-of


activity indicator reporting 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

❖ 
Lessons learned, and 
❖ 
Recommendations for USAID’s future interventions 

● 
Close out/Demobilization Plan 
In order to efficiently close-out this activity and reduce time and costs for both parties, 
USAID/Morocco requests that, 120 calendar days prior to award completion, the 
Recipient shall submit a closeout/demobilization plan for AOR approval. The 
closeout/demobilization plan shall include: 

a) a draft property disposition plan, 
b) plan for the phase-out of operations, 
c) delivery schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the 
agreement, and 
d) timetable for completing all required actions in the demobilization plan, 
including the submission date of the final property disposition plan to the 
Agreement Officer. 
● 
Other Reporting 
During the life of the award, the Recipient may be required to prepare and submit other 
special reports concerning specific activities and/or analyses as directed by the AOR or 
other USAID Officials in English, French and/or Arabic. These requests will be in 
writing and will specify the due date. 

4. Program Income 
Program income is not anticipated. 

5. Environmental Compliance 
The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental sustainability 
as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate 
is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), which, in part, require 
that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 

Environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are specified in the 
following paragraphs of this NOFO. In addition, the recipient must comply with host country 
environmental regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAI . In case of conflict 
between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

This NOFO is issued with the acknowledgement that a deferral (ME 19-68) received concurrence 
from the Middle East Bureau Environmental Officer on 9/23/2019 based on the justification that 
there is insufficient information available concerning which sites will be supported by the activity 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

to evaluate their potential environmental impacts, thereby qualifying the activity for a deferral per 
22 CFR 216.3 (a)(7)(iv) for the purpose of issuing this NOFO. No activity funded under this 
solicitation will be implemented unless an environmental threshold determination, as defined 
by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity. Based on the accepted proposal and prior 
to sub-obligation of funds, USAID will prepare an IEE which will be incorporated as part of 
the award. 

While USAID anticipates that many of the likely activities will fall under one or more of the 
Categorical Exclusions described in 22 CFR 216, respondents to the NOFO must include as part 
of their proposal their approach to achieving environmental compliance and management, 
especially those relevant to any and all interventions pertaining to rehabilitation/refurbishment, to 
include: 

1. The respondent’s approach to selecting and screening the proposed sites while taking into 
consideration the climate risks to these sites. 
2. The respondent’s approach to developing and implementing an environmental review 
process for a grant fund and/or an EMMP which will include: 
-health and safety (including hazards such as structural integrity, asbestos 

containing materials, lead, mold, etc.) 

-water and sanitation 

-material selection 

-construction oversight 

-Operations and Maintenance plan 

3. The respondent’s approach to providing necessary environmental management expertise, 
including examples of past experience of environmental management of similar activities. 
4. The respondent’s illustrative budget for implementing the environmental compliance 
activities. For the purposes of this solicitation, applicants should reflect illustrative costs 
for environmental compliance implementation and monitoring in their cost proposal. 
In case of a sub-grants component, the recipient will be required to use an Environmental Review 
Form (ERF) or Environmental Review (ER) checklist using impact assessment tools to screen 
grant proposals to ensure the funded proposals will result in no adverse environmental impact, to 
develop mitigation measures, as necessary, and to specify monitoring and reporting. Use of the 
ERF or ER checklist is called for when the nature of the grant proposals to be funded is not well 
enough known to make an informed decision about their potential environmental impacts, yet due 
to the type and extent of activities to be funded, any adverse impacts are expected to be easily 
mitigated. Implementation of sub-grant activities cannot go forward until the ERF or ER checklist 
is completed and approved by USAID. The recipient is responsible for ensuring that mitigation 
measures specified by the ERF or ER checklist process are implemented. 

The recipient will be responsible for periodic reporting to the USAID Agreement Officer 
Representative, as specified in this solicitation. As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual 
Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer 
Representative and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as 
appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities under this solicitation to determine if 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. If the 
recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID review and 
approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID approval 
of environmental documentation amendments. 

Any activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from USAID. 

[END OF SECTION F] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

The Agreement Officer for this Award is: 

Mr. Zachary Clarke 
Regional Agreement Officer 
USAID/MERP 

zclarke@usaid.gov 

The Acquisition and Assistance Specialist for this Award is: 

Ms. Salya Yacoubi 
Supervisory Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 
USAID/Morocco 

syacoubi@usaid.gov 

[END OF SECTION G] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

● 
USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The 
Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the 
expenditure of public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be 
subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 
● 
Applications with Proprietary Data 
The Applicant who includes data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any 
purpose or used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the 
cover page with the following: 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed 

– in whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, 
however, an award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of 
this data, the U.S. Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data 
to the extent provided in the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. 
Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from 
another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in 
sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 
Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the 
following: 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the 

title page of this application.” 

● 
Other relevant information: 
Links to applicable regulations and references: 
-Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) / Systems for Award Management (SAM) 
http://www.dnb.com and www.sam.gov 

-ADS Series 300 Acquisition and Assistance 

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/agency-policy/series-300 

● 
Further background on USAID’s Gender can be found here: 
Gender: Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment and ADS Chapter 205 -Integrating 
Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID's Program Cycle. 
[END OF SECTION H] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

SECTION I: ANNEXES 

ANNEX 1 -STANDARD PROVISIONS 

● 
The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization 
that is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory and “required as applicable” 
Standard Provisions in full text for either U.S. or non-U.S. Non-Governmental 
Organizations. 
Please refer to the following website to access the Mandatory Standard Provisions for U.S. 
and Non-U.S. Non-Governmental Organizations: 

http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 

http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab 

● 
The new special award requirement below will be incorporated in the award: 
Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication 
and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (November 2020) 

FOR U.S. ORGANIZATIONS 

USAID has been granted a temporary waiver under Section 889(d)(2) that will allow the 
recipient to use award funds through September 30, 2022, to procure certain 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR 

200.216. Based on this waiver, all costs incurred for covered telecommunications and 
video surveillance services or equipment will be allowable through September 30, 2022, 
without regard to the cost principle at 2 CFR 200.471. Procurements made on or after 
October 1, 2022, will be unallowable in accordance with 2 CFR 200.471. 
[End of Special Award Requirement] 

FOR NON-U.S. ORGANIZATIONS 

USAID has been granted a temporary waiver under Section 889(d)(2) that will allow the 
recipient to use award funds through September 30, 2022, to procure certain 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in the 
standard provision “Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and Video Surveillance 
Services or Equipment (AUGUST 2020).” Based on this waiver, all costs incurred for 
covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment will be 
allowable through September 30, 2022, without regard to the standard provision 
“Allowable Costs” and the cost principle at 2 CFR 200.471. Procurements made on or 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

after October 1, 2022, will be unallowable in accordance with the standard provision 
“Allowable Costs” and 2 CFR 200.471. 

[End of Special Award Requirement] 

● 
The new provision below related to the Personal Protective Equipment 
(PPE)/Covered Material purchase will be incorporated in the award: 
Procurement of “Covered Material” 

1. Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, and notwithstanding anything in this award 
to the contrary, no funds under this award may be used for the procurement of 
“Covered Material” as listed below without the prior written consent of the Agreement 
Officer. For purposes of this provision , “Covered Material” shall consist of the 
following: 
● 
N95 Filtering Facepiece 
Respirators, including 
devices 
that 
are 
disposable, halfface-
piece, non-powered, air-purifying particulate respirators intended for use to cover 
the nose and mouth of the wearer to help reduce the wearer’s exposure to pathogenic, 
biological, airborne particulates; 
● 
Other 
Filtering Facepiece 
Respirators 
(e.g., those 
designated as 
N99, N100, R95, 
R99, R100, P95, P99, or P100), including single-use, disposable, half-mask 
respiratory protective devices that cover the user's airway (nose and mouth) and offer 
protection from particulate materials at an filtration-efficiency level 3 equivalent to 
an N95 filtering facepiece respirator according to Section 84.181 of Title 42 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR); 

● Elastomeric,air-purifying respirators and appropriate particulate filters/cartridges; 
● 
PPE 
surgical 
masks, including masks 
that 
cover 
the 
user's 
nose 
and mouth and 
provide a physical barrier to fluids and particulate materials; 

● 
PPE 
gloves 
or 
surgical gloves, including those 
defined at 
Sections 
880.6250 (exam 
gloves) and 878.4460 (surgical gloves) of Title 21 of the CFR and such gloves 
intended for the same purposes; 

●Ventilators; and 
● 
COVID-19 test kits that are meant for the United States market. 
For clarity, non-medical grade masks, including cloth masks, are not included in the 
list of “Covered Material” above. Further, USAID may modify the list of "Covered 
Material" from time-to-time, in writing; any such changes to the list shall apply 
prospectively. 

2. The restrictions set forth in paragraph 1 above shall not apply to the procurement of 
Covered Material: 

NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

(a)for the protection of and use by the recipient’s or sub-[recipient’s or contractor’s] 
staff; or 
(b)for the safe and effective continuity of USAID-funded programs, including for the 
protection of beneficiaries, provided that such items are manufactured locally or in the 
same geographical region as the country in which USAID is providing assistance, as 
defined by the U.S. Department of State’s regional system (Africa, East Asia and the 
Pacific, Europe and Eurasia, Near East, South and Central Asia, and Western 
Hemisphere), and provided that such items are not, and could not reasonably be 
expected to be, meant for the United States market. 
The Agreement Officer may change the exemptions set forth in this paragraph in writing; 
any such changes shall apply prospectively. 

[End of Special Award Requirement] 

● 
Special award requirement relating to the prohibition on certain telecommunication 
and video surveillance services or equipment (November 2020) 
USAID has been granted a temporary waiver under Section 889(d)(2) that will allow the 
Recipient to use award funds through September 30, 2022, to procure certain 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR 

200.216. Based on this waiver, all costs incurred for covered telecommunications and 
video surveillance services or equipment will be allowable through September 30, 2022, 
without regard to the cost principle at 2 CFR 200.471. Procurements made on or after 
October 1, 2022, will be unallowable in accordance with 2 CFR 200.471. 
[End of Special Award Requirement] 

[END OF SECTION I] 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

ANNEX 2 – BRANDING STRATEGY & MARKING PLAN 

GUIDANCE AND GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS -BRANDING/MARKING FOR 
ASSISTANCE AWARDS 

GUIDANCE 

USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, activities, public communications, or commodities 
implemented or delivered under co-funded instruments – such as grants, cooperative agreements, 
or other assistance awards that usually require a cost share – generally are “co-branded or co-
marked.” In accordance with 2 CFR 700.16, this policy applies to these assistance awards even 
when the award does not require any cost sharing. 

The Religious and Ethnic Minorities 
Activity is an assistance award and will therefore be co-
branded. 

Co-branding and co-marking means that the program name represents both USAID and the 
implementing partner and the USAID identity and implementer’s logo must both be visible with 
equal size and prominence on program materials produced for program purposes. However, the 
AO, after consulting with the activity manager/requesting office, may determine that activity goals 
require that the USAID Identity be larger and more prominent. A host-country symbol or ministry 
logo or other U.S. Government seal or logo may also be added, if applicable. 

Marking is not required for recipient’s offices, vehicles, and items the recipient procures for its 
own administrative use. The prohibitions on use of the USAID Standard Graphic Identity (see 
ADS 320.3.1.4 and 320.3.6) apply by USAID policy to recipients of grants and cooperative 
agreements. 

The branding and marking plan shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700.16 and the provision 
entitled Marking and Public Communications under USAID Funded Assistance. For more 
information on Branding Strategy and Marking Plan, please visit USAID’s branding policies 
documentation in ADS 320: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/320.pdf. 

Marking requirements, including requests for presumptive exceptions and waivers for assistance 
awards must be in accordance with 2 CFR 700.16(h). 

Additional information materials on USAID branding, including the USAID Graphic Standards 

Manual and Partner Co-Branding 
https://www.usaid.gov/branding. 
Guide, can be downloaded here: 
Templates, logos, and brand identity logos 
https://www.usaid.gov/branding/resources#downloads 
may be found here: 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 

With reference to ADS 320.3.3.2 and 2 CFR 700.16, the Recipient shall prepare a Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan containing information responding to the electronic file template 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

provided as a separate Microsoft Office Word file entitled “Annex 2 -Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan Outline”. 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

ANNEX 3 – ACTIVITY MONITORING, EVALUATION & LEARNING PLAN 
TEMPLATE 

Electronic version of the plan template is provided as a separate Microsoft Office Word file -see 
the document “Annex 3 -MEL Plan Outline”. 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

ANNEX 4 – PAST PERFORMANCE QUESTIONNAIRE TEMPLATE 

Electronic version of the form template is provided as a separate Microsoft Office Word file -see 
the electronic file “Annex 4 -Past Performance questionnaire Template”. 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


NOFO 72060821RFA00001 
Religious and Ethnic Minorities Activity (REMA) 

ANNEX 5 – DETAILED AND SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

Electronic version of the form template is provided as a separate Microsoft Office Word file -see 
the electronic file “Annex 5 -Detailed and Summary Budget Template”. 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

[END OF SECTION I] 

[END OF NOFO 72060821RFA00001] 


ANNEX 2 


TEMPLATE 

“USAID [ACTIVITY NAME] BRANDING STRATEGY” 
AWARD TITLE 
AWARD NUMBER 
DATE OF PLAN 

With reference to ADS 320.3.3 and 2 CFR 700, below is the required Branding Strategy: 

1) Program Name 
[Name] (Follow naming guidelines in March 16, 2016 USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-
branding Guide, Section 4 entitled Grants, Cooperative Agreements & Assistance. 

Identify activity name in English and host-country language(s). 

2) Desired level of visibility: Select high, medium or low visibility determined by considerations for each 
activity and its communication strategy and include rationale. 
3) Positioning 
This section discusses how to publicize the program, visibility considerations, and includes a description of 
the communications tools to be used. 

The Recipient may use co-branding and co-marking in accordance with ADS 320.3.3.1 for visual, textual 
and verbal materials and communications, which may be translated into host-country languages as 
appropriate. Presumptive exceptions will be outlined in the Marking Plan and if/when a situation arises 
that is not considered in the Marking Plan, it will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR) and Agreement Officer (AO). 

• 
Will a program logo be developed and used consistently to identify this program? If yes, please attach a 
copy of the proposed program logo. (Please note that all logos must be approved by Branding Champions 
in Washington). 
4) Program Communications and Publicity 
• 
Who are the primary and secondary audiences for this activity? 
• 
What communications or activity materials will be used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries? 
• 
What is the main activity message? 
• 
Will the recipient announce and promote publicly this activity to host country citizens? If yes, what press 
and promotional events are planned? 
• 
Please provide any additional ideas about how to increase awareness that the American people support 
this activity. 

5) Key milestones and opportunities 
The following key milestones are anticipated to generate awareness that the program is from the American 
people. These milestones may be linked to specific points in time, such as at the beginning or end of a program, 
or to an opportunity to showcase reports or other materials (consult ADS ADS 320 and 2 CFR 700). These 
include, but are not limited to: 

• 
training events, 
• 
publishing reports, 
• 
highlighting success stories, 
• 
promoting final or interim reports, and 
• 
communicating program impact/overall results 
• 
speaking engagements, including in communities. 
6) Acknowledgements 
• 
Will there be any direct involvement from a host country government ministry? If yes, please indicate 
which one or ones. Will the recipient acknowledge the ministry as an additional co-sponsor? 

“USAID [ACTIVITY NAME] MARKING PLAN” 
AWARD TITLE 
AWARD NUMBER 
DATE OF PLAN 
Marking Plan for the [Name] Activity 

With reference to ADS 320.3.3 and 2 CFR 700, below is the required Marking Plan: 

1. MARKING 
1.1 MARKING PLAN 
Table 1 outlines the types of materials and activities that may be produced under the USAID [Name] Activity Any 
materials and activities that are not anticipated below, but are produced under the initiative, will also be subject to 
branding guidelines and AO approval, as appropriate. The goal is to mark activities, and not implementing partners. 

All materials, activities and deliverables marked with the USAID logo for the [Name] Activity will follow design 
guidance for color, type, and layout in the USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide 
(March 2016) as related to equipment, reports, studies, events, and public communication (including printed 
products, audio, visual, and electronic materials), etc. The USAID logo will be used for programmatic 
correspondence. Recipient’s letterhead will be used for administrative correspondence and will not have the 
USAID logo. Business cards will not show the USAID logo but may use text: USAID Recipient. 

After award and prior to printing, please provide graphic examples of visual marking of materials, activities and 
deliverables using the USAID logo and activity name in situations of co-branding and no-branding, in both English 
and Arabic. 

There are two criteria used to determine when the disclaimer provision must be used: 

a) As per 2 FR 700.16(c) (1) Studies, reports, publications, Websites, and all informational and promotional 
products not authored, reviewed, or edited by USAID; and 
b) As per the discretion of the AOR and Recipient’s consideration of a specific situation. 
However, AOR should review and approve all public communication materials where USAID logo is used. 

The provision is as follows in English and Arabic: 

This study/report/Website/video (specify) is made possible by the support of the American People through the United States 
Agency for International Development (USAID). The contents of this (specify) are the sole responsibility of (name of 
organization) and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government. 


Sub-recipient: As specified in the standard provisions, the marking requirements will “flow down” to sub-recipients 
or sub-awards, and will include the USAID-approved marking provision in all USAID funded sub-awards, as follows: 
“As a condition of receipt of this sub-award, marking with USAID identity of a size and prominence equivalent to 
or greater that the recipient’s, sub-recipient’s, other donor’s or third party’s is required.” 

TABLE 1. MARKING PLAN FOR MATERIALS AND ACTIVITIES (illustrative examples only) 

Follow the guidelines contained in the USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide (March 
2016). 

Category/Material Type of Marking 
Visual, Verbal, Textual 
Disclaimer 
Administrative 
Activity related stationery products The USAID logo will be used. Visual 
Textual 
Contract Deliverables: documents, 
publications, studies, reports, 
papers, technical assistance 
consultant reports 
Follow guidelines for exclusive 
marking. Use specific language for 
deliverables when submitted to 
USAID for review. 
Visual 
Textual 
Program Communication 
Technical reports, publications, 
documents, studies 
The USAID logo will appear on the 
cover; design follows guidelines for 
exclusive branding unless co-
branding is acceptable or an 
exemption is provided for no 
branding. 
Visual 
Textual 
__ 
Consider Disclaimer 
Training materials, manuals and 
sessions 
The USAID logo will appear on the 
cover of documents and verbal 
branding will be used at training 
sessions; design follows guidelines 
for exclusive branding unless co-
branding or an exception for no 
marking is indicated. 
Visual, 
Textual, 
Verbal 
__ 
Consider Disclaimer for Visual & 
Textual 


Audiovisual: Video, CDs-ROM, 
Animated Infographics 
The USAID logo will be printed on 
CD labels, splash screen/menus, and 
packaging; design follows guidelines 
for exclusive branding unless co-
branding or an exemption is 
indicated for no marking. 
Visual 
PowerPoint presentations 
The USAID logo is required as per 
USAID presentation template; 
design follows guidelines for the 
exclusive branding unless co-
branding is acceptable or an 
exemption for no branding is 
indicated. Templates available at 
www.usaid.gov/branding/resources 
Visual 
Posters, banners, exhibition booth 
signs, event signage 
The USAID logo will appear on the 
material; design follows guidelines 
for exclusive branding unless co-
branding or an exemption for no 
branding is indicated. 
Visual 
Program public awareness, advocacy 
and behavior change materials and 
activities 
The USAID logo will appear on each 
material based on the purpose and 
type of material, target audience and 
how to be used. Design follows 
guidelines for exclusive branding 
unless co-branding or an exemption 
for no branding is indicated. 
Visual, 
Textual or 
Verbal 
Web portal and social media 
platforms (Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, 
blogs, others) 
Follow guidelines in ADS 558 for 
appropriate branding and marking. 
Visual 
Textual 
Institutional Communication 
Photographs, Infographics The USAID logo or “USAID” in text 
will appear on the material; design 
follows guidelines for exclusive 
branding unless co-branding or an 
exemption for no branding is 
indicated. 
Visual 
Textual 
__ 
Consider Disclaimer on Infographics 
Collateral, print information 
material (i.e., success stories, fact 
The USAID logo will appear on 
printed materials; design follows 
guidelines for exclusive branding. 
Visual 
Textual 


sheets, articles, feature stories, 
others) others) 
Equipment purchased for their own 
use 
The USAID logo will appear on 
items; exclusive branding unless co-
branding is acceptable or an 
exemption for no branding is 
indicated. 
Visual 

Table 2. Exceptions to Contract Marking Requirements 

If applicable, use one or several of the following exceptions to fill out Table 2, depending on the circumstances. In 
addition to the table below, details about why the exception is required must be attached to this marking plan for 
AO approval. 

2 CFR 700.16 (h) Presumptive Exceptions 

The following exceptions reflect USAID’s non-emergency practices in not marking certain communication 
materials for programmatic reasons. The AO, in consultation with the Activity Manager/AOR, has the authority to 
determine that marking is not appropriate when: 

a. Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where independence or 
neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Election monitoring or ballots, and voter information literature; Political party support or public policy 
advocacy or reform; Independent media, such as television and radio broadcasts, and newspaper articles and 
editorials; and PSAs or public opinion polls and surveys. 
b. Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations whose data or findings 
must be seen as independent. 
c. Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, policies, studies, 
assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, PSAs, or other communications better positioned as “by” 
or “from” a cooperating country ministry, organization, or government official. 
d. Impair the functionality of an item, such as sterilized equipment or spare parts. 
e. Incur substantial costs or be impractical, such as items too small or other otherwise unsuited for individual 
marking, such as food in bulk. 
f. Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate on such items as condoms, toilets, bed 
pans, or similar commodities. 
g. Conflict with international law, such as the international recognized neutrality of the International Red Cross 
(IRC) or other organizations. 
h. Deter achievement of program goals, such as cooperating with other donors or ensuring repayment of loans. 

Category/Material for exception Specific Exception(s) 
Visual, Verbal, 
Textual 
Administrative 
Program Communication 


Institutional Communication 
Commodities and Equipment 


ANNEX 3 


PROGRAM CYCLE 


ADS 201 Additional Help 
ACTIVITY MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING PLAN 
TEMPLATE 

Introduction 

The template that follows this introductory page provides a suggested outline and basic guidance for the 
development of an Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (Activity MEL Plan) by a USAID 
implementing partner. As noted in USAID’s ADS 201.3.4.10: 

Activities must have an approved Activity MEL Plan in place before major implementation actions 
begin. USAID Project Managers should work with the USAID Contracting Officer’s Representative 
(COR), Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), Government Agreement Technical 
Representative (GATR), or Activity Manager to ensure that the Activity MEL Plan is consistent with 
and meets the data collection needs of the Project MEL Plan, the Mission’s Performance 
Management Plan (PMP), and the Mission’s annual Performance Plan and Report (PPR). 

For Acquisition and Assistance (A&A) awards, implementing partners must submit a proposed 
Activity MEL Plan to the COR/AOR in accordance with the guidelines in their award or agreement, 
often within 90 days of an award. In cases of partner country government agreements, the 
monitoring approach, including performance indicators, should be jointly agreed upon by the 
Mission and the host-country government entity as part of the direct agreement with the government. 

How to Use This Template 

While Activity MEL Plans are required, this template is not required. Nor is there any Agency-wide 
required structure or format of Activity MEL Plans. This template is merely offered as a helpful tool for 
USAID staff and implementing partners. 

USAID Missions and other Operating Units that choose to provide a standard Activity MEL Plan 
template to their implementing partners may adopt this template, adapt it, or devise a standard template 
of their own. USAID Missions and other Operating Units may also leave the decision of how to structure 
and format the Activity MEL Plan to their implementing partners. 

USAID implementing partners should consult with their COR or AOR about specific requirements or 
recommendations for their Activity MEL Plan. 

The italicized guidance text in each template section provides recommendations for what to include in 
that section, including examples and sample text. For additional guidance on Activity MEL plans see the 
USAID How-To Note: Activity Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Plan. 

Please note: This document uses terminology based on USAID ADS Chapter 201: Program Cycle 
Operational Policy. Per ADS 201, this document refers to A&A awards (e.g., contracts, grants, 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


cooperative agreements) as activities, not projects. Projects typically incorporate multiple activities 
planned to achieve a shared purpose. 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


[ACTIVITY TITLE] 
ACTIVITY MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING 
PLAN 

Approved Date: [e.g., January, 2019] 
Version: [1] 
Contract/Agreement Number: [Insert number] 
Activity Start and End Dates: [e.g., January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2023] 
AOR/COR/Activity Manager Name & Office: [Insert name, office] 
Submitted by: [Insert name, position] 

[Name of Prime Implementing Partner (IP)] 

DISCLAIMER 

The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States 
Agency for International Development or the United States Government. 


Table of Contents 

[ACTIVITY TITLE]___________________________________________________________ 3 
Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan _________________________________ 3 

Table of Contents _________________________________________________________________ 4 
List of Acronyms __________________________________________________________________ 5 

1. Introduction _______________________________________________________________ 6 

1.1 Project Theory of Change and Logic Model_________________________________________ 6 

1.2 Activity Theory of Change _______________________________________________________ 6 

2. Monitoring Plan ___________________________________________________________ 7 

2.1 Performance Monitoring ________________________________________________________ 7 

2.2 Context Monitoring_____________________________________________________________ 8 

3. Evaluation Plan ____________________________________________________________ 8 

3.1 Internal Evaluations ____________________________________________________________ 8 

3.2 Plans for Collaborating with External Evaluators____________________________________ 9 

4. Learning Plan _____________________________________________________________ 9 
5. Roles, Responsibilities, and Schedule __________________________________________ 10 
6. Resources ________________________________________________________________ 10 
7. Change Log ______________________________________________________________ 10 
Annexes ___________________________________________________________________ 12 

Annex I: Indicator Summary Table _________________________________________________ 12 
Annex II: Indicator Reference Sheets ________________________________________________ 15 
Annex III: Data Management ______________________________________________________ 16 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


List of Acronyms 

[Insert acronyms here] 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


1. INTRODUCTION 
This section introduces the Activity MEL Plan and provides summary background information relevant to 
the MEL Plan. 

Start with a brief introduction of the Activity MEL Plan, its purpose and intended use. Please note that 
this plan will be updated periodically in response to changes in the activity theory of change, 
implementation, or feedback received on MEL efforts. Sample text: 

Updates to this plan will be provided to the [USAID COR/AOR] for review and approval on a 

[quarterly/semi-annual/annual basis] (per contract or agreement) or whenever revisions to the plan 

are proposed. 

1.1 Project Theory of Change and Logic Model 
If this activity is part of a USAID project and information about the USAID project has been provided by 
USAID, then: 

• 
Provide a brief (no more than one page) summary description of the project’s theory of change; 
• 
Include the project logic model; and 
• 
Highlight where this activity fits in the project logic model. 
1.2 Activity Theory of Change 
Include a brief summary description of the activity theory of change based on activity planning 
documents or work plans. Typically, this will include the following information: 

• 
The context in which the development problem is situated; 
• 
If-then (causal) outcomes needed to achieve the desired change and evidence used to support 
those casual predictions; 
• 
Major interventions that the activity will undertake to catalyze these outcomes; and 
• 
Key assumptions that underlie the success of this theory. 
A logic model that graphically depicts the activity theory of change is also recommended to be included 
in this section. If included, it is recommended that the logic model highlight the activity’s most important 
performance indicators, linking each performance indicator to the result in the logic model measured by 
that indicator, as shown in the example on the following page. 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


Example Logic Model with Attached Performance Indicators 


Note: There is no standard format for logic models. Please see the Project Logic Model How-to Note for 
examples of different types of logic models. 

2. MONITORING PLAN 
This section provides information on how the activity implementing partner will monitor the performance 
of the activity and contextual factors that may affect activity performance and inform learning and 
adaptation throughout implementation. For additional information on Monitoring at USAID, visit the 
USAID Monitoring Toolkit. 

2.1 Performance Monitoring 
Describe the efforts that the activity implementing partner will undertake to monitor performance. This 
should include monitoring the quantity, quality, and timeliness of outputs and relevant outcomes to which 
the activity is expected to contribute. Efforts to monitor performance may include a range of quantitative 
and qualitative methods such as surveys, direct observation, qualitative interviews, focus groups, expert 
panels, the recording of administrative actions, etc. 

The Activity MEL Plan must include relevant performance indicators of activity outputs and outcomes. 
For more information about performance indicators, see the Selecting Performance Indicators guidance 
document. 

A summary of all performance indicators that the activity implementing partner will report to USAID 
should be listed in a summary table in Annex I. Include all performance indicators required or requested 
by USAID, including required foreign assistance standard indicators, and all additional performance 
indicators deemed necessary by the activity implementing partner for monitoring and reporting on 
progress. 

Each performance indicator must: 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


• 
Be linked to an intended result (output or outcome) that it measures. 
• 
Have a corresponding Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) that is complete and 
sufficient, and included in Annex II. The PIRS should be completed in coordination with USAID, 
or even provided by USAID, when multiple partners are collecting data on the same performance 
indicator. If the PIRS is not complete at the time the plan is submitted to USAID, it must be 
completed within three months of the start of indicator data collection. 
• 
Have a baseline. If baseline data have not been collected at the time this plan is submitted to 
USAID, the plan should note when baselines will be collected. Baseline data collection should be 
completed before the start of implementation actions related to that performance indicator. 
• 
Have targets. If targets have not been set at the time this plan is submitted to USAID, the plan 
should note when targets will be set. Targets should be set prior to collecting and reporting data 
(other than baseline data) on an indicator. 
• 
Be disaggregated by sex when measuring person-level data. 
2.2 Context Monitoring 
The Activity MEL Plan should include, if relevant, a description of any efforts that the activity 
implementing partner may undertake to monitor the conditions and external factors relevant to activity 
implementation. These may include: environmental, economic, social, or political factors, programmatic 
assumptions, and operational context. Efforts to monitor context may include a range of quantitative and 
qualitative methods such as surveys, direct observation, qualitative interviews, focus groups, expert 
panels, tracking of independent third-party indicators, etc. 

If the activity implementing partner is planning to track context indicators, these should be reported in 
the summary list of indicators in Annex I. The Context Indicator Reference Sheets (CIRSs) should be 
included in Annex II, if any context indicators are planned. 

3. EVALUATION PLAN 
3.1 Internal Evaluations 
Internal evaluations are evaluations that are conducted by the activity implementing partner or its subcontractor(
s), often with the intent to learn and adapt during implementation. Implementing partners are 
not required to conduct an internal evaluation unless it is stipulated in their contract or agreement. 
Implementing partners may propose to conduct an internal evaluation in their Activity MEL Plan. 

This section of the Activity MEL Plan identifies any internal evaluations that the activity implementing 
partner plans to manage over the life of the activity. For each internal evaluation, the plan should 
include (at minimum): 

• 
the type of evaluation (performance or impact); 
• 
purpose and expected use; 
• 
proposed evaluation questions; 
• 
estimated budget; 
• 
planned start date; and 
• 
the estimated completion date. 
[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


The evaluation plan should also clarify the expected level of USAID involvement, if any, such as 
reviewing an evaluation Statement of Work (SOW) or draft report. 

The USAID Evaluation Toolkit includes an evaluation plan template that may be adapted for use in this 
section. 

3.2 Plans for Collaborating with External Evaluators 
It is USAID’s responsibility to inform the activity implementing partner if an external evaluation of the 
activity is planned. An external evaluation is an evaluation that is contracted directly by USAID. If such 
an evaluation is planned, this section may explain how the implementing partner will interact with the 
evaluation team to support the external evaluation. Even if one is not planned, this section could outline 
expectations for collaboration in the event that an external evaluation is later determined to be necessary. 

Sample text: 

[The implementing partner] will assist external evaluators commissioned by USAID by: 

• 
Reviewing and providing feedback on draft evaluation designs, draft evaluation data collection 
instruments, and the draft evaluation report. 
• 
Sharing data used for performance monitoring. If this includes person-level data, [the 
implementing partner] will anonymize the data prior to providing it to the evaluation team. 
• 
Providing written responses to an evaluation self-assessment questionnaire. 
• 
Making staff available to answer questions related to the activity. 
• 
Supporting the evaluation team in identifying and obtaining access to activity stakeholders, 
beneficiaries, and sites of operation. 
• 
Supporting the evaluation team in holding stakeholder meetings to discuss and develop 
recommendations based on evaluation findings. 
4. LEARNING PLAN 
This section explains the activity’s approach to learning from monitoring data, evaluation findings (if 
applicable) and other learning efforts, and how the activity implementing partner – in collaboration with 
USAID and other key stakeholders – will seek to pause, reflect, learn, and adapt throughout 
implementation. Activity implementing partners may broaden the scope of this section to function as a 
Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) plan for the activity. The plan may include: 

• 
Learning questions based on the activity or project’s logic model or potential gaps in the 
technical knowledge base, and efforts to explore those questions. 
• 
Knowledge generation, capture, and sharing efforts, including at activity close-out. 
• 
Reflection opportunities (e.g., during work planning or quarterly reporting, after-action reviews, 
or other learning events). Information on potential participants, frequency, and utilization 
should be included. 
• 
Plans for adaptive management, based on learning and knowledge gained during 
implementation, including from identified learning questions that will enable the implementing 
partner and its key stakeholders to prompt course corrections as needed. 
• 
Strategic collaboration activities designed to support learning and adapting with and for key 
stakeholders (including USAID) relating to specific questions identified in the learning plan. 
[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


For more information on CLA and learning plans, visit the USAID CLA Toolkit. 

5. ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES, AND SCHEDULE 
This section provides a schedule of individual and recurring MEL tasks during the life of the activity. 
This may be a simple matrix outlining tasks, responsible parties, and dates for initiation and completion. 
A calendar (including a link to a shared calendar) or Gantt chart may be included to illustrate the 
schedule. A more detailed narrative may also be included to address roles and responsibilities among 
multiple partners (such as sub-awardees) and involvement from USAID or other stakeholders. MEL tasks 
to include in this schedule may include data collection efforts, data quality assurance activities, data 
analysis and visualization, special studies, assessments, learning processes and events, quarterly report 
preparation, etc. 

This section may also describe the various monitoring, evaluation, and learning reports and other 
information (including ad hoc and recurring reports) that will be provided to USAID during the life of the 
project. This may include, for example, quarterly reports, performance indicator data, activity location 
data, research documents, TrainNET data, learning products (i.e., syntheses, event readouts, learning 
and adaptation summaries), etc. 

Include a summary of the content and how information will be transmitted to USAID and in what format 
(for instance through a partner portal of a management information system, in-person check-ins, as part 
of a quarterly report submission, or in an Excel file). A table may be a useful way to summarize 
anticipated reports and related information. 

Example Table: Schedule of Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Reports to USAID 

Report Frequency Transmission to 
USAID 
Description of Content/ 
Expected Format 

6. RESOURCES 
Specify the budget allocated to monitoring, evaluation, and learning by listing the tasks, estimated costs, 
and proportion of the budget. Please use a table to present the information. 

7. CHANGE LOG 
The Activity MEL Plan should be adjusted in response to changes in activity (or relevant project) 
implementation, feedback received on MEL efforts, changes in the operational context, and other new 
information. This section includes a table to describe the changes that are made to the Activity MEL Plan 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


over time. For more information about making changes to an Activity MEL Plan, please see USAID’s 
How-to Note: Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan. 

Example Change Log 

Date Change by: Change to: Description of Change: 
Effective 
date of 
change 
Person who 
made the 
change 
Section of the Activity 
MEL Plan changed. If 
an indicator has been 
changed, include the 
indicator number. 
Summarize the change that was made to the 
Activity MEL Plan and the reason the change was 
made. 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


ANNEXES 

Annex I: Indicator Summary Table 

An example Indicator Summary Table is provided below and a template is available in the USAID Monitoring Toolkit. This plan may be adapted to include other 
information based on what is most relevant to the needs of the activity implementing partner or the USAID Operating Unit. 

Please note that an Indicator Summary Table is not the same as an Indicator Tracking Table or monitoring information system. The Indicator Summary Table is a 
text table found in a PMP, Project MEL Plan, or Activity MEL Plan. It contains information about the indicators for which USAID plans to collect data. The 
Performance Indicator Tracking Table is a spreadsheet or database form where indicator data is recorded. Per ADS 201.3.5.7, performance indicator data must 
be stored in an Indicator Tracking Table or monitoring information system. Also, including information from an indicator’s PIRS in the Indicator Summary Table 
does not replace the need for a PIRS for each performance indicator. A template and guidance for developing a PIRS is available in the USAID Monitoring 
Toolkit. 

Example Indicator Summary Table 

Indicator 
Result 
Measured by 
Indicator 
Type of 
Indicator Data Source Frequency Unit of 
Measure 
PPR 
(Y/N) 
Baseline Endline 
Date Value Date Target 
Examples… 
Indicator DR.1.5-1 Number of 
USG-assisted courts with 
improved case management 
systems 
Improved 
operations of 
East Tambou 
civil courts. 
Performanc 
e / Standard 
Implementing 
Partner 
count of 
courts 
assisted. 
Reported 
annually. Number Y 09/2017 0 09/2022 120 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


Indicator 
Result 
Measured by 
Indicator 
Type of 
Indicator Data Source Frequency Unit of 
Measure 
PPR 
(Y/N) 
Baseline Endline 
Date Value Date Target 
Indicator 3.4.1(a) Neonatal 
mortality rate (number of 
deaths of infants during the 
first 28 days of life per 1,000 
live births) in childbirth 
facilities in the southern 
region of East Tambou. 
Improved child 
birth outcomes 
in the southern 
region of East 
Tambou. 
Performanc 
e / Custom 
Survey of 
child birth 
facility vital 
registration 
data. 
Reported 
quarterly. 
Number 
per 1,000 Y 01/2016 55.3 09/2021 40.0 
Indicator 3.4.1(b) 
FEMALE - Neonatal 
mortality rate (number of 
deaths of infants during 
the first 28 days of life per 
1,000 live births) in 
childbirth facilities in the 
southern region of East 
Tambou. 
Improved child 
birth outcomes 
in the southern 
region of East 
Tambou. 
Performanc 
e / Custom 
Survey of 
child birth 
facility vital 
registration 
data. 
Reported 
quarterly. 
Number 
per 1,000 Y 01/2016 55.2 09/2021 40.0 
Indicator 3.4.1(c) MALE Neonatal 
mortality rate 
(number of deaths of 
infants during the first 28 
days of life per 1,000 live 
births) in childbirth 
facilities in the southern 
region of East Tambou. 
Improved child 
birth outcomes 
in the southern 
region of East 
Tambou. 
Performanc 
e / Custom 
Survey of 
child birth 
facility vital 
registration 
data. 
Reported 
quarterly. 
Number 
per 1,000 Y 01/2016 55.4 09/2021 40.0 

Instructions: 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


1. Indicator: State the name and unique identifier for the indicator that will measure the expected result listed in the next column. Disaggregates of an indicator 
may be listed on a separate row below the parent indicator. 
2. Result Measured by Indicator: State the result statement and the unique identifier for the expected result in the theory of change that the indicator intends to 
measure. 
3. Type of Indicator: State whether the indicator is a (1) a “Performance” indicator or a “Context” indicator, and (2) a “Standard” indicator or a “Custom” 
indicator. 
4. Data Source: State the source of the data 
5. Frequency: State how often the data are reported to USAID. 
6. Unit of Measure: State the unit of measure (e.g., number of hours, percent of households). 
7. PPR: State “Y” if this indicator is included in the PPR or “N” if this indicator is not included in the PPR. (Note: standard indicators are required to be 
reported in the PPR.) 
8. Baseline Date: State the month and year (mm/yyyy) when the baseline data were collected. 
9. Baseline Value: State the value of the indicator at “baseline,” i.e., before major implementation actions of the planned USAID-supported activity. 
10. Endline Date: State the month and year (mm/yyyy) when the endline data will be collected. 
11. Endline Value: State the specific value of the indicator expected at “endline,” i.e., when major implementation actions of the planned USAID-supported 
activity have been completed. 
[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


Annex II: Indicator Reference Sheets 

All performance indicators require a PIRS. Completed Performance Indicator Reference Sheets 
(PIRS) for all indicators in the Activity MEL Plan may be included in this annex. 

For Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators, see the Standard Foreign Assistance Indicator 
Reference sheets and Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators and USAID PIRS Cross Walk. 

While not required, it is recommended that context indicators have completed indicator reference 
information, stored in a Context Indicator Reference Sheet (CIRS). They may also be included in 
this annex. 

USAID Performance Indicator Reference Sheet 
Name of Indicator: 
Name of Result Measured (DO, IR, sub-IR, Project Purpose, Project Outcome, Project 
Output, etc.): 
Is This a Performance Plan and Report Indicator? No Yes for Reporting 
Year(s) 
If yes, link to foreign assistance framework: 
DESCRIPTION 
Precise Definition(s): 
Unit of Measure: 
Data Type: 
Disaggregated by: 
Rationale for Indicator (optional): 
PLAN FOR DATA COLLECTION 
Data Source: 
Method of Data Collection and Construction: 
Reporting Frequency: 
Individual(s) Responsible at USAID: 
TARGETS AND BASELINE 
Baseline Timeframe: 
Rationale for Targets (optional): 
DATA QUALITY ISSUES 
Dates of Previous Data Quality Assessments and Name of Reviewer(s): 
Date of Future Data Quality Assessments (optional): 
Known Data Limitations: 
CHANGES TO INDICATOR 
Changes to Indicator: 
Other Notes (optional): 
THIS SHEET LAST UPDATED ON: 

15 

[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


Annex III: Data Management 

A section or annex on managing data is an opportunity to explain how data will be managed at 
all stages, from collection to reporting. If several organizations are jointly managing the activity, 
this section should touch on how data will be consistently handled across the partners to ensure a 
high quality of aggregated data. Potential topics to cover in this section include the following: 

• 
Data Collection summarizes the data collection methods included in the PIRS or 
evaluation plans and explains the methods and frequency with which data will be 
gathered, including potential limitations or challenges. 
• 
Data Quality for indicators should reasonably meet USAID’s five data quality standards 
of validity, integrity, precision, reliability, and timeliness. This section may address 
findings from Data Quality Assessments and note whether any mitigating actions are 
being taken to improve data quality. 
• 
Data Storage sections detail the formats in which data will be held and shared. This 
includes file types (for example, Microsoft Word, Excel, paper copies), larger storage 
units (for example, a private server, a cloud-based system, file cabinets), and processes 
for sharing knowledge internally and externally. For more information, see ADS 579. 
• 
Data Security protocols for every activity should meet a basic threshold of restricting 
access to key offices and workspaces, preventing unauthorized computer access, and 
safeguarding data during both storage and transfer. This section should detail data 
security protocols. In particular, personally identifiable information (PII) must be 
protected. For more information, see the USAID Monitoring Toolkit Data Security 
Guidance. 
• 
Data Analysis and Use details how USAID or the implementing partner will analyze and 
use data. If specific software will be employed for this purpose, it may be useful to 
identify it by name or function. 
[Insert Short Activity Name] Activity MEL Plan [Date] 


ANNEX 4 
PAST PERFORMANCE QUESTIONNAIRE 

Applicant-please fill out the following questionnaire as clearly and as objectively as possible. The 
information you provide will be used for source selection purposes. Applicant, please send the 
completed questionnaire (Section A by the Applicant and B by the Reference) directly to the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) by email to 

usaidmoroccocontracts@usaid.gov and Ms. Salya Yacoubi, Supv. Senior Acquisition and 
Assistance Specialist, at syacoubi@usaid.gov with a copy to Zachary Clarke, Regional Agreement 
Officer, at zclarke@usaid.gov by the time and date indicated on the RFA cover page. 

SECTION A: (To be filled by the Applicant) 

Applicant's Name: ______________________________________________________________ 
Was the Applicant the Prime or Subawardee on the project: _____________________________ 
Project Name: __________________________________________________________________ 
Project Scope/Description: _______________________________________________________ 
Period of Performance: __________________ Dollar Value of Award: __________________ 
Primary Location(s) Work: ______________________________________________________ 
Name of Contact Person: _________________________________Phone: _________________ 
Date Contacted: __________________ Employer: ____________________________________ 
Contact’s Role or Knowledge of the Project: ________________________________________ 

SECTION B: (To be filled by the contact person named in Section A above) 
“QUALITY”: 1. Please comment on your satisfaction with the Awardee’s quality of work: 

Page |1 


“SCHEDULE”: 2. Please comment on the Awardee’s timeliness of award performance: 

“MANAGEMENT”: 3. Please comment on the quality of your relations with the Awardee during 
award performance: ______________________________________________________ 

“COST CONTROL”: 4. Please comment on the Awardee’s ability to control costs: ________ 

“REGULATORY COMPLIANCE”: 5. Please comment on the awardee’s ability to comply with 
applicable regulations: _______________________________________________________ 

“SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS”: 6. For prime applicants who are not small business 
concerns, please comment on the Awardee’s utilization of Small Business concerns as 
subcontractors, including efforts in achieving small business participation goals: _____________ 

Please provide comments on Awardee’s Key Personnel: _______________________________ 

Page |2 


