 

A close-up of a logo Description automatically generated with low confidence 


 

Issue Date: September 1, 2022 

 

Deadline for Questions: September 9, 2022, at 17:00 Ghana Local Time 

 

Closing Date & Time 

for Concept paper: October 7, 2022, at 17:00 Ghana Local Time 

 

Closing Date & Time 

for Full Applications: 30 days after receiving Request for Full Application at 17:00 

Ghana Local time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) - Request for 
Applications (RFA) 72064122RFA00008 

 

Program Title: USAID/Ghana Strengthening Accountability in Ghana's 
Education System (SAGES) 

 

 

To All Interested Parties: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement USAID/Ghana’s Strengthening 
Accountability in Ghana’s Education System (SAGES) Systems Strengthening Activity (the 
Activity). Eligibility for this award is not restricted; see Section C of this Request for Applications 
(RFA). 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant that best meets the objectives of this NOFO 
based on the Merit Review Criteria described in this NOFO, subject to a Risk Assessment. 

 

Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO 
thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and 
selection process. This is a multi-tiered NOFO in accordance with the Automated directives System 
(ADS) 303.3.6.1(c). Selection under this RFA will be based on a two-step process: 

 

● Phase 1 - Concept Paper submissions: open to all eligible organizations as described in this 
RFA. 


 

● Phase 2 - Full Application submissions: by invitation only to applicants selected during Phase 
1 evaluation. 



To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet the eligibility standards described in Section C of this RFA. This funding opportunity is posted 
on www.grants.gov and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this NOFO and to ensure that 
the RFA has been received from the internet in its entirety. USAID bears no responsibility for data 
errors resulting from the transmission or conversion process. If you have difficulty registering on 
www.grants.gov or accessing the RFA, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 
or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. USAID expects that applicants will 
have equal access to all local organizations needed to implement this contract and strongly 
discourages exclusivity agreements with local organizations. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section 
D.3.2.3.7. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions regarding this solicitation to the point of contact identified in Section 

D. The deadline for questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline 
will be furnished to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to 
www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the U.S. 
Government nor does it commit the U.S. Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or 
submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the 
applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

Taniece Owusu 

Supervisory Agreement Officer (acting) 
USAID/West Africa 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ...................................................................................................... 2 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION .................................................................................... 16 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION .............................................................................................. 19 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ......................................................... 20 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ........................................................................... 40 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ................................................. 43 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) ............................................................... 50 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION ........................................................................................................ 51 
ANNEX 1 – BUDGET TEMPLATE .............................................................................................................. 52 
ANNEX 2 - ACCOUNTABILITY FOR LEARNING FRAMEWORK………………………………….....53 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

STRENGTHENING ACCOUNTABILITY IN GHANA’S EDUCATION SYSTEM 
(SAGES) ACTIVITY 

 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

The purpose of the Strengthening Accountability in Ghana’s Education System (SAGES) Systems 
Strengthening activity is to improve primary education service delivery through institutionalizing 
accountability in the Ghanian primary education system. The activity will support efforts led by 
the Government of Ghana (GOG), in particular the Ministry of Education (MOE) and its 
agencies/affiliates, to: 

● Strengthen the enabling environment for education accountability; and 
● Increase the performance of education system actors and improve the effectiveness of 
their interactions with each other in support of education accountability. 


 

2. BACKGROUND 

 

2.1 Country and Sector Context 

 

Although the GOG is responsible to deliver quality public services to its citizens, the latest Afro-
barometer Round 8 Survey (2019) report indicates a decline in citizens approval ratings on the 
GOG’s ability to do so. Between 2017 and 2019, service sectors, including education, experienced 
an 8 percent decline in approval ratings. The report also noted that these sectors were among the 
most problematic areas in need of government support. Eighty percent of citizens surveyed 
indicated that, in their opinion, the GOG has done little or nothing at all to strengthen service 
delivery in these areas. 

 

In contrast to public perception, the GOG has made substantial progress advancing access to basic 
education over the past decade. Between 2010 and 2015, net enrollment grew from 60.1 percent 
to 79.5 percent for kindergarten and from 77.8 percent to 91.5 percent for primary. Data published 
in 2020 indicates that approximately 71 percent of Ghanian children complete primary education. 
While laudable, it is important to note that no region is close to achieving universal primary 
completion and significant disparities exist in completion rates between regions, sex, and wealth. 
For example, primary completion rates in the Northern region range from 53-55 percent, while 
completion rates in the Southern regions range from 63 to 79 percent. The percentage of women 
and girls who have never been to school is highest in the Northern region (59 percent), followed 


by Upper West (53 percent), and Upper East (45 percent), compared with only 14 percent of 
women and girls in Greater Accra. In addition, one-fifth (20 percent) of women and girls in Greater 
Accra have completed secondary education or higher, compared with only 4 percent or less in the 
Northern, Upper East, and Upper West Regions. 

 

Although access to education services is reasonably high, evidence suggests that service quality 
continues to be weak and may be driving public perception. Data from the 2020 Foundational 
Learning module assessment at the Grade 2/3 level indicates that only 7 percent of Ghanaian 
children in Grade 3 have the expected reading skills for that grade and 8 percent of children have 
the expected numeracy skills. The data indicates that for students who remain in school, about half 
eventually obtain foundational skills (equivalent to Grade 2/3) in reading and numeracy. By grade 
9, 66 percent of students are able to read at Grade 2/3 level or above, and 44 percent possess Grade 
2/3 numeracy skills. Similar to disparities in access, learning gaps vary by region, with the lowest 
shares of children with reading and numeracy skills in the Northern region. 

 

As articulated in United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) 
2017 Global Education Monitoring (GEM) Report “Accountability in Education: Meeting our 
Commitments,” increased accountability can help address persistent deficiencies in the provision 
and quality of education services. Accountability can be described as the quality of being 
answerable and reliable, with the government and other education actors obliged to report on the 
fulfillment of their responsibilities. The achievement of learning outcomes relies on multiple actors 
fulfilling often shared responsibilities, and good-quality education is the product of an education 
system in which all actors make a concerted effort to meet their responsibilities. An accountability 
approach to education requires a supportive enabling environment and actors equipped to fulfill 
their responsibilities with the appropriate skills, with information and sufficient resources 
available. 

 

2.2 Ministry of Education’s Commitment to Accountability 

 

The Ministry of Education (MOE) recognizes the importance of strengthening accountability in 
the sector. Its Education Strategic Plan (ESP) 2018-2030 emphasizes accountability mechanisms 
and articulates the need for a sector-wide accountability framework. In addition, the MOE 
identified the following critical sub-activities to address system accountability: 

● Design, implement, and enforce an education accountability framework along the chain of 
education service delivery from the MOE to the school level. 
● Design and pilot a sector-wide accountability framework to include formal performance 
reviews for administrators at all levels of the education system; and 
● Review and implement the education accountability framework, including appropriate 
communication and training activities. 


 


To advance the ESP and the Education Sector Medium-Term Development Plan (ESMTDP), the 
MOE and the Ghana Education Service (GES) partnered with Education Development Partners 
Group and RISE (Research on Improving Systems of Education) at the University of Oxford to 
develop an Education Accountability Framework (EAF) for basic education. Developed under the 
Ghana Accountability for Learning Outcomes Project (GALOP),1 the EAF defines the roles, 
responsibilities, and expectations of key players in the education system - from classroom 
practitioners to policy makers - and includes overarching principles to inform the development of 
guidelines and regulations for key processes. It also examines key system-wide processes that 
focus on accountability for learning: school inspections; national large-scale assessments; school 
monitoring and supervision; and the Education Management Information System (EMIS). 

1 GALOP is a results-based financing mechanism implemented by the MOE and jointly funded by the World Bank, 
United Kingdom's Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) and the Global Partnership for 
Education (GPE). 

2 USAID/Ghana Country Development Cooperation Strategy (https://www.usaid.gov/ghana/cdcs). 

 

2.3 Relationship with USAID Strategic Priorities in Ghana 

 

USAID/Ghana’s five-year (2020-2025), integrated, behavior-led Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) outlines the Mission’s approach to support Ghana’s achievement of 
key sustainable development goals and advance its journey to self-reliance in an effort to achieve 
its CDCS goal of “a more self-reliant Ghana offering a productive, healthy life to all its citizens.”2 
To this end, the CDCS Development Objectives (DO), intermediate results (IR), and sub-
intermediate results (sub-IRs) are defined as behavioral outcomes—specific actions that must be 
adopted and practiced to achieve and sustain each DO and the Mission’s path to self-reliance. 

 

The behavior-led approach focuses on identifying and changing behaviors by strengthening factors 
that support change and mitigating those that hinder change. It requires that partners: (1) identify 
behaviors by actors required to achieve intended results; (2) support interventions that will promote 
the identified behaviors; and (3) measure activity performance based on progress toward achieving 
identified behaviors. This contrasts with the conventional USAID approach of defining results and 
interventions with more limited attention focused on actor behaviors. 

 

This activity aligns with the behavioral approach of the CDCS with its focus on the engagement 
of key actors (government, private sector, and citizens) and the collective actions that they must 
take to address the critical issue of low service quality in Ghana’s primary education system. It 
will contribute to the achievement of USAID/Ghana’s CDCS by focusing on supporting the 
following CDCS IRs and Sub-IRs: 

 

● IR 2.1: National government leads policy implementation for efficient service delivery. 
○ Sub-IR 2.1.3: Government implements evidence-based policies to improve health, 
education, agriculture, energy, and fishery sectors. 






 

● IR 2.2: Local authorities manage policy implementation for efficient service delivery. 
○ Sub-IR 2.2.3: District Education Offices (DEOs) implement education 
accountability framework policy. 





 

● IR 2.3: Service providers adhere to national quality standards. 
○ Sub-IR 2.3.2: Head Teachers accountably manage schools. 
○ Sub-IR 2.3.3: Teachers deliver quality instruction. 





 

● IR 3.1: Government improves equitable delivery of quality services in health, education, 
and agriculture. 
○ Sub-IR 3.1.1: Government increases investment in quality services. 





 

● IR 3.3: Citizens adopt improved practices to advance their well-being and resilience. 
○ Sub-IR 3.3.5: Parents send their children to school year-round. 





 

2.4 Relationship to USAID and Other Donor Programs 

 

USAID Education Programs 

The SAGES Systems Strengthening activity is one of two activities that form the Strengthening 
Accountability in Ghana's Education System (SAGES) project, which aims to “strengthen the 
delivery of quality and equitable basic education services to children in public primary schools to 
achieve improved learning outcomes.” The project focuses on strengthening the accountability 
structures within the basic education system to improve both quality and equity. This activity will 
directly complement a planned government-to-government (G2G) activity - called the SAGES 
G2G activity - that will operationalize the EAF to strengthen accountability within the education 
system to improve education service delivery. The G2G activity emphasizes collaboration with 
local stakeholders to identify challenges and mobilize resources to improve the quality of 
education. It is designed to achieve the following three activity results (AR): 

● AR 1: GOG plans and allocates resources for implementation of EAF. 
● AR 2: Education officials implement the EAF. 
● AR 3: Educators and education administrators deliver quality services in public primary 
schools. 


 

AR 1 and AR 2 focus on systems strengthening and will affect all MOE levels and actors in 
Ghana’s public education system nationwide. AR 3 will improve the quality of instruction with 
school and community level interventions in the 17 districts in the Zone of Influence (ZOI) in 
northern Ghana. The GOG entities responsible for implementing the G2G activity include the 
MOE and its affiliates/agencies, including the GES, the National Schools Inspectorate Authority 
(NASIA), the National Teaching Council (NTC), and the National Council for Curriculum and 
Assessment (NaCCA). The SAGES Systems Strengthening activity will collaborate closely with 


the SAGES G2G activity to support the MOE and its agencies/affiliates to achieve the objectives 
of the G2G activity by using the successful applicant’s knowledge, skills, and expertise to provide 
capacity development to the full range of MOE actors that comprise the education system. 

 

Other USAID Programs 

USAID/Ghana’s CDCS calls for cross-sectoral integration in order to maximize the impact of 
assistance. This is particularly relevant for USAID activities operating in the 17 districts that 
comprise the ZOI in northern Ghana. The SAGES Systems Strengthening activity will also 
coordinate with and leverage USAID’s other programs operating in the accountability sphere, such 
as: 

 

● The Performance Accountability Activity. This is a cross-sectoral activity that focuses on 
delivering quality public services with increased accountability. It will be implemented 
under the Accountable Governance Project (AGP), which aims to “advance accountable, 
effective and responsive governance.” The activity will strengthen civil society oversight 
and feedback into government performance in public service delivery; and support 
government and public service providers, especially at the local level, to be more 
responsive to citizen demand in delivering quality essential services. It will define and 
measure success by the increased practice of behaviors determined to be at the foundation 
of transparent, accountable, and inclusive governance; as well as contribute to efforts to 
prevent violent extremism. 
● The Resilience in Northern Ghana (RING II) activity will leverage the Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural Development’s (MLGRD)’s performance-based grants mechanism 
to provide grants to improve responses of local systems to nutrition and resiliency needs 
of vulnerable households in 17 Municipalities and District Assemblies (MMDAs) and four 
Regional Coordinating Councils. MMDAs that meet established eligibility criteria will 
receive a USAID supplementary matching grant to scale up nutrition, food security and 
resilience interventions within their medium-term development and annual implementation 
plans. 


 

Other Related Donor Programs 

As noted above, GALOP, is a five-year, $281.7 million project funded by the World Bank, the 
United Kingdom's Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO), and the Global 
Partnership for Education (GPE). GALOP’s objective is to improve the quality of education in 
low-performing basic schools and to strengthen education sector equity and accountability in 
Ghana. It targets the 10,000 lowest-performing basic schools (kindergarten, primary and junior 
high schools) and all special schools. GALOP’s five key components are: 

1. Strengthen teaching and learning through support and resources for teachers. 
2. Strengthen school support, management, and resourcing. 
3. Strengthen accountability systems for learning. 



RFANo.72064122RFA00008Page7of53

4.Technicalassistance, institutional strengthening, monitoring, and research.
5.Supporting the Education Response Plan to COVID-19 in Ghana for continued learning, 
recovery and resilience in basic schools.
USAID agreed to support Component 3:Strengthen accountability systems for learning.As noted,
GALOP supported the MOE and GES to develop the EAF in 2019,which is the foundation for thework under this component. This activity, coupled with the SAGES G2Gactivity, encompassesUSAID’s continued efforts to support Component3. 

3. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND THEORY OF CHANGE
While the development of the EAF is a steptoward institutionalizing accountability in theeducation system, theEAF has not yet been fully implemented. The SAGESSystems 
Strengthening activitywill seek toaddress two overarching challenges to implement the EAFand 
increase accountability within the primary education system:

1.The enabling environment lacks critical elementsnecessary for accountability to function.
This includes:
a.Lack of financial resources for primary education, including resourcesfor both 
EAF implementation and the provision of supervisory services of localeducation 
officials.
b.Lack of a designated authority with appropriate skills within the MOE to plan for,
implement, and monitor the EAF throughout theeducation system.
c.Lack of clearly defined rules to guide behavior of system actorsand enforce the 
system of accountability, including a lack of established performance standards,
administrative regulations, and incentives; and 
d.Lack of awareness of the role of accountability in education and the roles of eachsystem actor with regardto executing responsibilities with accountability.
2.System actors do not perform their duties as required for a well-functioning system ofeducation accountability:
a.System actors lack the skills needed to perform their roles to the standard required. 
b.System actors do not interact witheachother as required which limits theeffectiveness offeedback channels.
c.System actors do not systematically engage in data-driven decision-making due tolimited data collection,management,and reporting. 
d.School and classroom actors lack management skills; and
e.Lack ofcollaboration and engagementat the school and community level. 
The theory of change for this activity posits that:


IF the enabling environment for accountability is established and IF system actors perform 
at minimum standards and interact effectively, THEN accountability will be 
institutionalized in the Ghanaian primary education system, which will lead to improved 
education service delivery. 

 

This theory of change is based on the premise that an education accountability system must be 
grounded in a supportive environment to enable sustained, improved service delivery. It requires 
that the system has established incentives to influence the behavior of actors, and that feedback 
loops exist to reinforce and address behaviors. It recognizes that the actions of individuals and 
agencies are interlinked and interdependent—they are responsible for supporting each other’s 
success and accountable to each other in the system. An accountable primary education system 
holds all individuals and every agency of the education sector responsible for contributing to 
delivery of quality services in the pursuit of improving learning outcomes. To that end, such a 
system must collectively recognize the important roles and responsibilities that central education 
authorities, regional and district education officers, head teachers, teachers, school management 
committees, parents, community leaders, the general public and the private sectors have to create 
systemic, sustainable accountability in Ghana’s education sector. 

 

4. PROPOSED OUTCOMES AND RESULTS 

 

The overall goal of the SAGES Systems Strengthening activity is to improve education service 
delivery by institutionalizing accountability throughout the primary education system. The activity 
has two objectives. The first objective, establish the enabling environment for accountability in 
the primary education system, refers to the conditions that must be in place for system actors to 
perform their roles. The second objective, increase the performance and improve the interactions 
among all key actors in the primary education system, focuses specifically on the ability of system 
actors to perform their defined roles. 

 

Objective 1: Establish the enabling environment for accountability in the primary education 
system. 

 

The SAGES Systems Strengthening activity will work closely with the MOE, GES, NASIA, NTC, 
NaCCA and other agencies/affiliates to establish the foundation needed for accountability in the 
primary education system, with a focus on financial resources, rules, and roles and relationships. 

 

Financial Resources. The applicant’s program description should include activities that will 
strengthen MOE system actors to better budget, plan and manage financial resources to implement 
the EAF. As part of this effort, the recipient should identify potential ways in which the MOE can 
better use resources, attract non-government financing, or introduce other creative financing 
mechanisms into the budget and planning process. 


 

Rules: The applicant’s program description should include activities that support the MOE in 
updating the EAF to define rules to enforce the system of accountability. This includes supporting 
the MOE to develop a system of accountability, or administrative regulations, to ensure incentives 
are in place to guide the behavior of key actors and defining the minimum performance standards 
and expectations for all key actors, including identifying relationships among actors. 

 

Roles and Responsibilities: The applicant’s program description should include activities that 
support the GES Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to clearly define roles, responsibilities, and 
relationships of each system actor under EAF. Activities should also address the need to increase 
awareness system-wide of the role of accountability in education as well as the impact of policy 
and budgetary decisions on learning outcomes. 

 

Objective 2: Increase the performance and improve the interactions among all key actors in 
the primary education system. 

 

A functioning education system requires that all actors perform their duties at a minimum standard, 
and that effective interactions, or relationships, exist between actors. Strong accountability 
relationships are essential to durable and adaptive local systems. These relationships provide the 
feedback channels that give a system its dynamism and ultimately its sustainability. The 
applicant’s program description should focus on improving the performance (roles) and 
interactions of all system actors (relationships) to better: 

 

● Advocate for improved resources and service delivery for primary education. 
● Perform their roles in education accountability to the required standard. 
● Interact and collaborate appropriately with other system actors. 
● Engage in data-driven decision-making through the systematic collection, management, 
and reporting of data; and 
● Identify and implement solutions to improve accountability. 


 

In addition, specifically at the community and school level in the ZOI, the recipient’s program 
description should include activities that work directly with local system actors to improve: 

● Management of schools and classrooms; and 
● Engagement and collaboration among SMCs, teachers, parents, and the community in 
support of education accountability. 


 

5. ACTIVITY PARAMETERS AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES 

 

The applicant should take the following parameters and guiding principles into consideration in 
developing their program description: 


 

5.1 Geographical Focus 

The SAGES Systems Strengthening program focuses on actors nationwide with the exception of 
school and community-level interventions that should focus on actors in the 17 districts in 
USAID’s ZOI in northern Ghana. 

 

5.2 Key System Actors 

At a minimum, the applicant’s program description must include activities that engage the 
following key actors in all system-level interventions: 

● MOE 
● GES - including the Regional Education Offices (REO) and District Education Offices 
(DEO) 
● NASIA 
● NTC 
● NaCCA 


 

In addition, at a minimum, the applicant’s program description must include activities that engage 
the following key actors in all community/school level interventions focused in the ZOI: 

● Head teachers 
● Teachers 
● School Management Committees (SMCs) 
● Parents 
● Community Leaders 


 

5.3 Behavior-Led 

The Applicant’s program description should align and advance USAID Ghana’s integrated, 
behavior-led approach as detailed in Section 2.3. 

 

5.4 Systems Strengthening 

Decades of donor investments directed at single levels and actors in the education system have not 
resulted in widespread or sustained improvement and resiliency for the system as a whole. The 
COVID-19 pandemic has further added pressure to already tenuous service delivery mechanisms, 
increasing the number of vulnerable people at risk of missing out on services, and unraveling many 
of the precious development gains made. Promoting accountability, sustainability, and inclusivity 
is critical to moving Ghana towards self-reliance. This requires a systems approach which engages 
actors at all levels of the education system and therefore, USAID/Ghana has made the strategic 
decision to focus on systems strengthening. 

 

The Applicant’s program description should incorporate approaches that engage and improve the 
system and foster sustainable accountability. 


 

5.5 Host Government Collaboration 

As described in Section 2.4, the SAGES Systems Strengthening activity complements 
USAID/Ghana’s SAGES G2G activity. To achieve complementarity, close coordination between 
the activities is essential. The applicant’s program description should describe plans for effective 
coordination with the MOE and other key GOG system actors described in Section 5.2. 

 

5.6 Universal Design for Learning 

Where appropriate, applicants should seek to utilize approaches that use principles of Universal 
Design for Learning (UDL)3, based upon the premise that all children and youth learn differently. 
UDL provides a set of concrete suggestions that can be applied to any discipline or domain to 
ensure that all learners can access and participate in meaningful, challenging learning 
opportunities. At the heart of the UDL framework is the following set of principles for curriculum 
development and instructional practice: use multiple means of engagement (foster learners’ 
motivation in a variety of ways); use multiple means of representation (present information to 
learners in a variety of ways); use multiple means of action and expression (enable learners to 
express what they learn in a variety of ways). 

3 https://www.cast.org/impact/universal-design-for-learning-udl 

 

The Applicant’s program description should incorporate approaches that take UDL guidelines into 
consideration in the context of advancing the activity objectives outlined in Section 4. 

 

6.0 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING 

 

6.1 Monitoring 

 

In accordance with USAID/Ghana’s behavioral-led approach, Mission activities must heavily 
focus on effectively measuring, analyzing, and evaluating identified behavioral outcomes that are 
designed to help monitor changes in peoples’ conditions and behaviors, the functionality of 
systems, and the effectiveness of institutions beyond the life of the strategy and each activity. 
Using data to understand the Mission’s contribution to success is essential, and the behavior-led 
approach requires a slight reorientation of how indicators are identified and tracked across the 
Mission program cycle. In addition to Standard Foreign Assistance indicators, applicants will be 
expected to develop an Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP) that 
includes indicators to measure behavioral outcomes. Monitoring data is used not only to track 
performance but also guide adaptive management and other activity decision-making. 

 

The SAGES Systems Strengthening activity will utilize a two-tiered monitoring system. It will 
include: 

 


Applicant monitoring: The successful applicant will provide the first tier of monitoring. Per the 
AMELP, monitoring will focus on measuring, analyzing, and evaluating identified behavioral 
outcomes that are designed to capture changes in: (i) citizens’ and service providers’ conditions 
and behaviors, (ii) the functionality of systems, and (iii) the likely effectiveness of institutions 
beyond the life of USAID assistance. Special attention will be paid to developing indicators that 
monitor the impact the Activity’s interventions are having on the conditions and behaviors of 
women and youth. The applicant will be expected to report on activity performance and changes 
in the context in which the activity is being implemented. 

 

USAID monitoring: The USAID/Ghana AOR and the alternate AOR will provide a second tier of 
monitoring. This will include reviewing the successful applicant’s quarterly and other reports and 
conducting site visits. This monitoring may also be carried out in conjunction with representatives 
of the MOE, GES, NASIA, NTC, NaCCA and other MOE agencies and affiliates. 

 

Illustrative Indicators 

Illustrative indicators are provided below. This list is not exhaustive and serves only as a guide. 

 

● Number of education administrators and officials who complete professional development 
activities with USG assistance (ES. 1-12). 
● Number of educators who complete professional development activities with USG 
assistance (ES.1-6). 
● Percent of head teachers who attend schools daily in USG-supported schools. 
● Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain a minimum grade-level 
proficiency in reading at the end of grade 2. 
● Number of PTAs or community-based school governance structures engaged in primary 
and secondary education supported with USG assistance. 


 

6.2 Evaluation 

 

USAID/Ghana may conduct independent evaluation(s) of the SAGES Systems Strengthening 
activity. The recipient must fully and openly collaborate with the identified evaluation 
contractor(s) to include providing activity data, status reports, and information on success against 
results. 

 

In addition to supporting any external evaluations, the recipient must report on approved research 
questions. Final research questions will come from the successful application (see Learning 
Agenda below). 

 

6.3 Learning agenda 

 

As part of the AMELP, the recipient will be expected to develop a learning plan, which may 
include different MOE and USAID regular dissemination platforms and hosting quarterly “pause 


and reflect” meetings with the MOE, its appropriate agencies and USAID to share learnings and 
challenges and identify needed adjustments. Key learning questions will be developed with a range 
of stakeholders, including USAID, MOE, and its appropriate agencies. Illustrative learning 
questions may include: 

● How does our programming factor the political economy realities in Ghana to maximize 
efficient service delivery? 
● Which aspects of accountability have the most impact on improvement of quality and 
equitable education service delivery? 
● How do we leverage the capacities of local service providers for efficient service delivery? 
What programmatic changes are needed to contribute to sustainable progress for improved 
service delivery? 
● Does increased awareness of the primary education budget and financial information lead 
to an increase in resources allocated for primary education? 
● When School Management Committees are engaged/active, is there increased 
accountability in schools/classrooms? 
● How can parents and school personnel maximize the learning potential of children with 
cognitive development delays and learning challenges? (e.g., those that have been caused 
by nutritional deficits?) 


 


 

 

Annex A - Acronym List 

 

AMELP: Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 

AOR: Agreement Officer Representative 

CDCS: Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

DEO: District Education Offices 

DO: Development Objectives 

DRG: Democracy, Rights and Governance 

EAF: Education Accountability Framework 

EMIS: Education Management Information System 

ESMTDP: Education Sector Medium-Term Development Plan 

ESP: Education Strategic Plan 

FCDO: United Kingdom's Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 

G2G: Government to Government 

GALOP: Ghana Accountability for Learning Outcomes Project 

GEM: Global Education Monitoring 

GES: Ghana Education Service 

GOG: Government of Ghana 

GPE: Global Partnership for Education 

IR: Intermediate Result 

MOE: Ministry of Education 

NaCCA: National Council for Curriculum and Assessment 

NASIA: National Schools Inspectorate Authority 

NTC: National Teaching Council 

REO: Regional Education Offices 

RISE: Research on Improving Systems of Education 

SAGES: Strengthening Accountability in Ghana’s Education System 

UNESCO: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

USAID: United States Agency for International Development 

ZOI: Zone of Influence 

 


 

Annex B: Zone of Influence Map 

 

A picture containing diagram
Description automatically generated
[END OF SECTION A] 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. ESTIMATE OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 


 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this NOFO. Subject to 
funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to provide $45M-$50M 
million in total USAID funding over a five-year period. 

 

 

2. START DATE AND PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE FOR FEDERAL AWARDS 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date will be 

February 1, 2023. 

 

3. SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 


 

USAID will be substantially involved in this Cooperative Agreement to help the Recipient 
achieve the agreement objectives in the following manner: 

 

3.1 Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plans: The Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR) will approve the Recipient's annual implementation plans (AIP) and any 
subsequent changes to the plans due to shifting context, new information, security conditions, 
etc. The AOR will participate in strategic planning sessions for the development of AIPs. The 
Recipient and AOR must review the agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure inadvertent 
changes to them are not approved through the AIP. 




 

3.2 Approval of the Activity Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP): The 




AOR will review and approve the AMELP and all subsequent changes to it. 

 

3.3 Approval of the Activity Communications & Outreach (C&O) Plan: The AOR will 
review and approve the C&O Plan and all subsequent changes to it. 

 

3.4 Approval of Key Personnel and Any Changes in Key Personnel: Key personnel are 
those individuals considered to be essential to the successful implementation of the award. 
USAID will be consulted early in the process of any proposed changes in key personnel 
following award, and the AO will approve the selection after AOR concurrence. Key 
personnel identified for this award will be identified and included prior to award, if 
applicable. 




 

3.5 Agency and Recipient Collaboration or joint participation: USAID and Recipient 
engagement in collaboration and joint participation may occur when the Recipient’s 
successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical 
knowledge. USAID anticipates collaboration and joint participation where there is sufficient 
reason for USAID’s involvement and the involvement shall be specifically tailored to 
support identified elements in the program description. Areas and spaces for joint 
participation and collaboration may be identified throughout the life of the Activity. All 
such direction or redirection must be within the program description budget, and other terms 
and conditions of the award. 




 

 


 

3.6 Direction of program to align with other USAID programs: The AOR will authorize 
specific kinds of direction or redirection because of interrelationships with other Activities 
sponsored by the U.S. Government or other donors and to ensure coordination and 
complementarity, avoid duplication of efforts, and/or support U.S. foreign policy 
considerations. All such direction or redirection must be within the program description, 
budget, and other terms and conditions of the award. 




 

4 ADMINISTRATIVE AND TECHNICAL INVOLVEMENT 


The following factors applicable to both grants and cooperative agreements are not 
considered substantial involvement during performance and include the following: 

1. Agency approval of recipient plans prior to award. 
2. Normal exercise of Federal stewardship responsibilities during the project 
period such as site visits, performance reporting, financial reporting, and audit 
to ensure the recipient accomplishes the objectives, terms, and conditions of 
the award. 
3. Unanticipated Agency involvement to correct deficiencies in project 
or financial performance from the terms of the assistance instrument. 
4. General statutory requirements understood in advance of the award, such as 
civil rights, environmental protection, and provision for the handicapped. 
5. Agency review of performance after completion; and 
6. General administrative requirements, such as those included in 2 CFR 200. 


Also, the Agency may provide technical assistance, guidance, or advice to the 
recipient during the period of the award to enhance collaboration or engagement 
with the recipient. Such technical assistance, guidance, or advice is not considered 
substantial involvement when: 

7. USAID provides it at the request of the recipient. 
8. The recipient is not required to follow it; or 
9. The recipient is required to follow it, but USAID provides it prior to the start 
of the award, and the recipient understands this prior to the award of the 
instrument, for example, when more-frequent reporting is required, as 
allowed by 2 CFR 200.327 and 2 CFR 200.328. 


 

5. AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 


The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 
935. Code 935 is defined as any area or country including the recipient country but excluding 
any country that is a prohibited source. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

6. NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Strengthening 
Accountability in Ghana’s Education System (SAGES) Activity, which is authorized by Federal 
statute. The Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program 
objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of 
sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering 
Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the 
terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 


 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 


Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. U.S. and non-US organizations may participate under 
this NOFO. Public International Organizations (PIOs), as defined by ADS 308, are eligible to 
submit an application. Any PIO that submits an application to this NOFO is agreeing to have all 
substantial involvement clauses (See Section B.3) included as special conditions in their final PIO 
cost-type agreement (See ADS 308.3.2.2 and ADS 308.3.9.1) or is otherwise ineligible for award. 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is required 
to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to 
obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. 

For-profit applicants must note that USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit for recipients 
under assistance instruments. Forgone profit does not qualify as cost-share or leverage. 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

2. COST SHARING OR MATCHING 


Cost sharing will strengthen local ownership of the program and sustainability of results. 
Therefore, Applicants must contribute at least $100,000 to support the USAID/SAGES Systems 
Strengthening activity. Applicants that do not meet the minimum cost share requirement are not 
eligible for award consideration. 

Cost share refers to the resources a Recipient contributes to the total cost of an agreement. Cost 
share will become a condition of the resulting award and will be included in the approved award 
budget. Cost share may be audited and must be verifiable from the Recipient’s records. U.S. 
organizations are subject to the requirements of 2 CFR 200.306, and non-U.S. organizations are 
subject to the Standard Provision, “Cost Share.” If a Recipient does not meet its cost share 
requirement, the AO may apply the difference between the actual cost share and the agreed upon 
cost share to reduce the amount of USAID funding for the following funding period, require the 
Recipient to refund the difference to USAID when the award expires or is terminated, or reduce 
the amount of cost share required under the award. 

 

3. NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS 


An applicant may submit only one application per organization; no individual investigator/ 
program director applications will be accepted. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 


 

SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. AGENCY POINTS OF CONTACT 


 

Name: Taniece Owusu 

Title: Supervisory Agreement Officer (acting) 

Email: tbaldwinowusu@usaid.gov 

 

Name: Nathan Strand 
Title: Agreement Officer 
Email: nstrand@usaid.gov 

 

Name: Ruth Amegashie 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: ramegashie@usaid.gov 

 

2. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


All questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the e-mail addresses 
above not later than the time indicated on the cover letter. Any information given to a 
prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other 
prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in 
submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective 
Applicant. 

 

3. GENERAL CONTENT AND FORM OF THE CONCEPT PAPER AND 
FULL APPLICATION 


This is a two-tiered NOFO in accordance with ADS, 303.3.6.1c Selection under this NOFO 
will be based on a two-step process: 

● Phase 1 - Concept Paper submissions: open to all eligible organizations as described 
in this NOFO. 


 

● Phase 2 - Full application submissions: by invitation only to applicants selected under 
Phase 1 evaluation. 


Applicants must first submit a concept paper for review. USAID/Ghana will evaluate all 
concept papers according to the criteria specified in this NOFO. If USAID/Ghana determines 
the concept warrants further evaluation per the selection criteria established, full applications 
will be requested. 

 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do 
so may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the concept paper and application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

 


Concept papers must comply with the following: 

● Page limitations. USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in 
the subsequent sections. 
● Language requirements. Concept papers must be written in the English Language. 
● Page formats. Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single-sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New 
Roman font. A 10-point font can be used for graphs, tables, and charts. Use, 1” margins, 
left justification, and headers and/or footers on each page that include consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● File format: Submit using a single searchable and editable PDF. 






 

Applications must comply with the following: 

● Page limitations. USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in 
the subsequent sections. 
● Language requirements. Applications must be written in English. 
● Page formats. Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single-sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New 
Roman font. A 10-point font can be used for graphs, tables, and charts. Use 1” margins, 
left justification, and headers and/or footers on each page that include consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● File formats. Submit using searchable and editable Microsoft Word or PDF formats, 
except budget files which must be submitted using Microsoft Excel. 
● The cost application must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. 






 

 

3.1 Phase 1 - Concept Paper – Open to all eligible organizations as described in this 
NOFO 

 

3.1.1 Submission Instructions 






Concept papers must be submitted electronically via email to Taniece Baldwin Owusu 
(tbaldwinowusu@usaid.gov), Nathan Strand (nstrand@usaid.gov), and Ruth Amegashie 
(ramegashie@usaid.gov). Email submissions must include the following information in the 
subject line: 

“RFA 72064122RFA00008 – [name of organization] - Concept Paper” 

3.1.2 Contents and Form 






Concept Papers must not exceed eight (8) pages in total. Each section also has a page limit 
that cannot be exceeded. Applicants are advised that any pages exceeding these limits will 
not be considered for evaluation. 

3.1.2.1 Applicant Information (up to 0.5 pages) 

This section must include the following information: 

a. Activity title. 
b. RFA number. 
c. Name of lead or primary organization(s) applying. 
d. Any partnerships and/or proposed sub-awardees; and 



e. Contact person, telephone number, email, address. 


3.1.2.2 Technical Concept (up to 6 pages) 

Applicants must describe how the proposed concept will achieve the 
program objectives in the NOFO Program Description, including: 

a. a results framework supporting the two objectives. 
b. evidence/rationale for the results framework. 
c. demonstrated knowledge of Ghana’s primary education system, its 
levels, its actors, and the challenges and opportunities of 
government accountability within that system. 
d. a conceptual approach to building and expanding school and 
community support and engaging schools and communities to 
support accountability and improved learning outcomes in the 17 
ZOI districts. 
e. how the program will meaningfully coordinate and leverage other 
programs in the accountability sphere and with local partners; and 
f. how the approach will support behavior-led change. 


 

3.1.2.3 Management Approach (up to 1 page) 

Applicants must provide an organizational chart (with titles and lines of 
reporting) depicting a notional management and staffing plan that will carry 
out the results framework described in the Technical Concept. The applicant 
must also provide the names and briefly outline qualifications of key 
personnel. If the applicant is considering any sub awardees, they should 
provide a brief overview of what role they would play in implementation of 
the program. 

. 

3.1.2.4 Estimated summary budget (up to 1 page) 

The Applicant must estimate prime award costs and costs for any proposed 
subawards. The summary budget must follow the template below: 

 

Estimated Summary Budget 

Cost Elements 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

Year 5 

Total 

Prime 
Award 
Direct 
Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Prime Award 
Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Proposed Cost 
Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL 
AWARD 
BUDGET 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

3.1.2.5 Relevant experience (up to 0.5 pages) 

The Applicant must provide three examples of its most recent projects, or 
projects most relevant to its concept paper, including the title of the project, 
location, dates, total funding, donor (if any), and brief description. 

 

3.2 Phase 2 - Full Application - Open only to organizations selected in Phase 1 

 

3.2.1 Full Application Submission Procedures 

 

Invited applicants must submit full applications to this NOFO no later than the closing date 
and time indicated in the letter requesting a full application. Late applications may be 
considered at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. Applicants must retain proof of 
timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date and 
time. Applicants must ensure that all necessary documentation is complete and received by 
USAID/Ghana on time. 

 

Full Applications must be submitted in two separate parts: (a) Technical Application and 
(b) Business/Cost Application. Please indicate in the subject line of the email whether the 
email relates to the technical application or the cost application. Your subject line should 
also indicate the desired sequence of emails (if more than one is sent) and of attachments 
(e.g., “No. 1 of 4”). 

 

For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email will have 
a subject line which says: "[RFA 72064122RFA00008], [organization name], Cost 
Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

All applications received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness 
to the NOFO and the application format. No additions or modifications will be accepted 
after the submission date. 

 

After the application has been sent electronically, immediately check your own email to 
confirm that the attachments were included. If a transmission error is discovered, please 
send the material again. Do not submit the same document unless there has been a change 
or send the same email more than once unless there has been a change; and if so, please 
note that it is a “corrected” email. 

 


3.2.2 Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application must be specific, complete, and concise. The application must 
demonstrate a clear understanding of the work to be undertaken, the responsibilities of all 
parties involved, offer critical thinking and analysis for each component, demonstrate how 
the programmatic approach and operational principles will be implemented, and tie the 
technical approach to the Objectives to be achieved. The application must take into account 
the requirements of the Activity and merit review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The technical application consists of eight sections as described below. Each section must 
comply with the section page limit listed. 

 

a. Cover Page (one page) 
b. Table of Contents (one page) 
c. Acronym List (one page) 
d. Technical Approach (15 pages) 
e. Management, Staffing Plan and Key Personnel (five pages) 
f. Outline of Year One Work Plan (five pages) 
g. Resumes and References for Key Personnel (two pages for each key personnel 
position) 
h. Key Personnel Letters of Commitment (one page each) 


 

Additional guidance, where needed, is provided for the following sections: 

 

 3.2.2.1 Cover Page (one page) 

 The Cover Page must include the following information 

a. Activity title 
b. RFA number 
c. Name of primary or lead organization (s) applying 
d. Any partnerships and/or proposed sub-awardees 
e. Contact person, telephone number, fax number, address, and types of 
name(s) and title(s) of person(s) who prepared the application, and 
corresponding signatures. 
f. The Tax Identification Number (TIN)/Employer Identification Number 
(EIN) and SAM Unique Entity ID (UEI) numbers of the Prime Applicant 
and any proposed sub-applicants. 


 

 3.2.2.2 Technical Approach (15 pages) 

The technical approach must provide a clear description of the Applicant’s 
proposed plan for achieving the objectives in the NOFO and results in the submitted 
Concept Paper Results Framework. The approach must describe how interventions 
will drive behavior-led changes. The Applicant must demonstrate clearly how the 
Objectives and Results will be achieved. 


Proposed interventions must demonstrate a clear understanding of the Ghana 
education system and the challenges and opportunities the MOE faces in 
implementing the Accountability for Learning Framework (referred to as the EAF). 
The Applicant must present a cohesive approach for integrating and leveraging its 
interventions with activities funded by USAID, other donors, and the GOG in the 
accountability sphere in Ghana. The Applicant must also present a plan which 
describes how they will meaningfully engage with local partners. 

The Applicant must also demonstrate a strategy and approach to systems 
strengthening and capacity building. It should be linked to evidence and past 
sustainable success in sustainably building the skills and capacity of host 
government actors to successfully fulfill their government roles. 

The technical approach must also reflect how the Applicant plans to learn and adapt 
its program to the changing needs and capacity-building requirements of the GOG. 

 

 3.2.2.3 Management and Staffing Plan and Key Personnel (five pages) 

 

Applicants must submit a Management and Staffing Plan that includes the 
following: 

● An organizational chart showing all positions proposed across all 
objectives, inter-staff relationships, proposed office structure, and 
integration of consultants (as applicable). 
● An overview of how activities and communication will be managed and 
coordinated between the prime and sub-recipients. 
● The proposed approach to recruitment and staffing for efficient program 
launch and effective performance. 
● A description of how adaptive management will be expressed through 
staffing skills, management structure, project organizational culture, 
business processes, and stakeholder engagement throughout project 
implementation. 


 

The Applicant must propose and justify four “Key Personnel” positions within its 
staffing plan and provide the following information for each: 

● Brief description of the role and responsibilities, 
● Qualifications and relevant work experience of individuals proposed, 
● Rationale for the appropriateness of proposed individual, and 
● Description of how the position and the individual filling it support effective 
implementation. 


 

 

 

 


3.2.2.4 Outline of Year One Work Plan (five pages) 

 

Applicants must submit an outline of the first year Work Plan, which illustrates the 
Offeror’s proposed activities and their planned timing and sequence, including 
major milestones and proposed incremental targets for Year 1. 

 

3.2.3 Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical 
Application. While no page limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are 
encouraged to be as concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The 
business (cost) application must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the 
budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed 
necessary for the Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 
CFR 200.205. Applicants will not submit any additional information with their initial 
application. 

 

Applicants should indicate the Exchange Rate of Ghana Cedi per US dollar that they use 
in developing their budget. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated 
below this listing with the letters for each requirement) 

 

3.2.3.1 Cover page 

 

The Business/Cost application must include a cover page containing the following 
information: 

a. Activity title. 
b. RFA number. 
c. Name of lead or primary organization(s) applying. 
d. Any partnerships and/or proposed sub-awardees; and 
e. Contact person, telephone number, fax number, address, and types of 
name(s) and title(s) of person(s) who prepared the application, and 
corresponding signatures 


 

3.2.3.2 SF 424 Form 

 

The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. 
Standard Forms can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the 
following links: 

 

 


Instructions 
for SF-424 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html 

Application for 
Federal 
Assistance (SF-
424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html 

Instructions 
for SF-424A 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html 

Budget 
Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html 

Instructions 
for SF-424B 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html 

Assurances 
(SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-
424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

3.2.3.3 Required Certifications and Assurances 

 

The Applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy 
with their full application: 

 

a. “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements 
of the Recipient” document found at 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mav.pdf 
b. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
c. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of 
Compliance if your organization's systems have been certified by 
USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

3.2.3.4 Budget and Budget Narrative 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or 
later versions) with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by 
project year, including itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) 
amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets 
with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make an award and 
may result in a rejection of the cost application. 

 

The Budget Narrative must be a written narrative in Word or PDF formats that 
explains individual cost elements and how they were estimated. The narrative must 
contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. 

 

The Applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements 
identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must 


be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the 
proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a 
minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), 
broken out by major budget category and by year for activities implemented 
by the Applicant and any potential sub-Applicants for the entire period of 
the program. See Section H for Summary Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the 
Agency to determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of 
funding to implement the Applicant’s program and are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each Sub-Recipient, for all federal funding and cost 
share, broken out by budget category and by year, for the entire 
implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, 
at a minimum: 

 

a. Salary and Allowances - Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include 
position title, salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each 
position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down by specific type 
and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed 
compensation is reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what 
is paid for similar work in other activities of the Applicant. Applicants must 
provide their established written policies on personnel compensation. If the 
Applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of compensation 
that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used 
and support market research. 


 

b. Fringe Benefits - (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate 
approved by an agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such 
rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an Applicant does not have a fringe 
benefit rate approved, the Applicant must propose a rate and explain how the 
Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include 
a detailed breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, 
gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

c. Travel and Transportation - Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, 
the number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals 
traveling, and the duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs 



must be based on the Applicant’s normal travel policies. When appropriate 
please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company 
travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

d. Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real 
Property- Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, 
supplies and the cost per unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include 
the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the basis for the estimates. The 
Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and 
reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, 
if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

e. Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed 
through to any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining 
whether the sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient 
budgets must align with the same requirements as the Applicant’s budget, 
including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

f. Knowledge Management - The Applicant must incorporate the estimated cost 
for knowledge management as described in Section A. 


 

g. AMELP - The Applicant must allocate sufficient human and financial resources 
within the budget necessary for successful implementation of the AMELP. 


 

h. Reports – The activity will require various reports throughout the life of the 
Activity as included in section F. 


 

i. Security – The Applicant must clearly identify security costs in the budget and 
budget narrative that demonstrates it has undertaken a thoughtful review of their 
security needs to successfully implement the Activity as presented in its 
technical approach 


 

j. Environmental Compliance – The Applicant must include enough resources in 
the budget to ensure it can comply with environmental requirements for this 
Activity. 


 

k. Other Direct Costs - This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such 
as report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams, and 
inoculations, as well as any other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the 
program proposed by the Applicant. The Applicant should indicate the subject, 
venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their 
relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

l. Indirect Costs - Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect 
costs or will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect 



costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. The application must identify 
which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable supporting 
information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 


 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

 

Eligibility: Any Applicant 

 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

 

Eligibility: Any Applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use 
that NICRA 

 

Initial Application Requirements: If the Applicant has a current NICRA, submit 
your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA 
was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information 
for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a 
provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. 
See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for 
further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

 

Eligibility: Any Applicant that has never received a NICRA 

 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either 
indirect or direct costs but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged 
as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected must be used consistently for 
all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate 
an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
Applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. 
See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged as A Fixed Amount 

 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, 
but approval is at the discretion of the AO 

 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a 
worksheet that includes the following: 

 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and 
estimates for the current year. 



● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of 
executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit 
and are identifiable to more than one program or activity, such as 
depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and 
telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently 
across all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits 
of that particular cost to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the Applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize 
the 10% de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further 
instructions and may request additional supporting information, including 
financial statements and audits, if the application is still under consideration 
after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
Applicant’s requested method. 

 

m. Cost Sharing - The Applicant must include the amount of cost-sharing resources 
to be provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such 
resources, and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants must 
also provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) 
of all organizations involved in implementing the resulting award. 


 

3.2.3.5 Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any 
requirements for prior approval by the Agency. If the Applicant would like the 
award to reflect approval of any cost elements for which prior written approval is 
specifically required for allowability, the Applicant must specify and justify that 
cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require 
prior written approval. 

 

3.2.3.6 Approval of Subawards 

 

The Applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have 
approved at the time of award. For each proposed subaward the Applicant must 
provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● SAM UEI Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury 
Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the 
System for Award Management (SAM) 



● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security 
designation list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the Applicant has completed a risk assessment of the 
subrecipient, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the Applicant’s plan 
for mitigation. 


 

3.2.3.7 UEI and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an Applicant unless the Applicant has complied with all 
applicable System for Award Management (SAM) requirements including. Each 
Applicant (unless the Applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is 
exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception 
approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

a. Provide a valid UEI number for the Applicant and all proposed 
sub-recipients. 
b. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining 
processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and 
consolidating hosting to make the process of doing business with the 
government more efficient (www.sam.gov). 
c. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at 
all times during which it has an active Federal award or an application or 
plan under consideration by a federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants 
are encouraged to begin the process early. If an Applicant has not fully complied 
with the requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID 
may determine that the Applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that 
determination as a basis for making an award to another Applicant. 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. Applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, 
including a Quick Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on 
www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to International Registrants. 

 

3.2.3.8 History of Performance 

 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance 
for all its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements 
involving similar or related programs, not to exceed three (3) awards as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization. 
• Award Number. 





• Activity Title. 
• A brief description of the Activity. 
• Period of Performance. 
• Award Amount. 
• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; 
and 
• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly 
observed the work at the organization for which the service was performed 
with complete current contact information including telephone number, and 
e-mail address for each proposed individual. 




 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may 
provide a short explanation and the corrective action taken. The Applicant should 
not provide general information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to 
obtain relevant information concerning an Applicant’s history of performance from 
any sources and may consider such information in its review of the Applicant’s 
risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award 
survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

3.2.3.9 Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

The Successful Applicant must provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 
(BSMP) to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer within 30 days of 
the award being made, which will be incorporated into the resulting award. It must 
include all estimated costs associated with the branding and marking of the 
Activity, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events and materials, etc. 

 

Applicants must briefly describe (not to exceed two pages) how they will promote 
USAID identity, U.S. Government’s support for this Activity and the Activity’s 
achievements in Ghana. It is a Federal statutory and regulatory requirement that all 
overseas programs, projects, activities, public communications, and commodities 
that USAID partially or fully funds under an assistance award or sub-award must 
be appropriately marked with the USAID identity. 

 

The branding and marking plan must be consistent with USAID’s Branding and 
Marking Policy. USAID’s Agreement Officer will have final approval of the 
branding strategy and marking plan. The branding and marking plan will be 
included in and made a part of the resulting associate cooperative agreement. 

 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
"Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named 
and positioned, and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and 
host country citizens. 


 


b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the 
Applicant, confers no rights to the Applicant and constitutes no USAID 
commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame 
specified by the Agreement Officer will make the Applicant ineligible for an 
award. 


 

d. The Applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and 
marking USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, 
materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are 
subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be 
incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative 
agreement, or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all the following: 


 

1. All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, 
such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

2. The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

i. USAID requires the Applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised 
of the USAID logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American 
people” as found on the USAID Web site at 
https://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or APS 
states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 






 

ii. USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible 
by (or with) the generous support of the American People” next to the 
USAID Identity when acknowledging contributions. 






 

iii. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
Applicant's identity. 






 

iv. If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the 
Applicant must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased 
during publicity for the program or project. 






 

v. USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or 
identity that competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to 
develop a separate logo to consistently identify this program, the 
Applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI of the 
RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 







 

3. The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, 
including direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

4. Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the 
program to beneficiaries. 

 

i. Describe the main program message. 






 

ii. Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcements, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 






 

iii. Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or 
project to host country citizens, such as media releases, press 
conferences, public events, and so forth. Applicants must incorporate the 
USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the American 
People.” 






 

iv. Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American 
people support this project or program. 

 

5. Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or 
ministry, including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country 
government. 

 

6. Any other groups whose logo or identity the Applicant will use on program 
materials and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be 
visibly acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of 
the award, the Applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the Applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be 
included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

 

2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
“Marking Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and 
program materials, and other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” 
which comprises of the USAID logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the 
American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency 
and is found on the USAID Web site at https://www.usaid.gov/branding. 
Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use 
of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 



 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the Applicant, 
confers no rights to the Applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an 
award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified 
by the Agreement Officer will make the Applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The Applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and 
marking USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, 
materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are 
subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be 
incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative 
agreement, or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all the following: 


 

1. A description of the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials that the Applicant plans to produce, and which will bear the USAID 
Identity as part of the award, including: 

 

i. Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature. 












 

ii. Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio-visual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded 
by USAID. 












 

iii. Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by 
USAID, including commodities or equipment provided under 
humanitarian assistance or disaster relief programs; and 












 

iv. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
Applicant's identity. 






 

v. Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, 
seminars, exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other 
public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the 
Recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the 
support of the American people. 






 

2. A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

i. The program deliverables that the Applicant plans to mark with the 
USAID identity. 













 

ii. The type of marking and what materials the Applicant will use to mark 
the program deliverables. 












 

iii. When in the performance period the Applicant will mark the program 
deliverables, and where the Applicant will place the marking. 












 

iv. What program deliverables the Applicant does not plan to mark with the 
USAID identity, and 












 

vi. The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 






 

3. Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an 
explanation of why the exemption would apply. The Applicant may request an 
exemption if USAID marking requirements would: 

 

i. Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or 
materials where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the 
program and materials. The Applicant must identify the USAID 
Development Objective, Interim Result, or program goal furthered by 
an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, 
examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 












 

ii. Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. 
The Applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be 
seen as credible. 












 

iii. Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, 
surveys or audits, public service announcements, or other 
communications. The Applicant must explain why each particular item 
or product is better positioned as a host-country government item or 
product. 












 

iv. Impair the functionality of an item. The Applicant must explain how 
marking the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 












 

v. Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The Applicant must explain 
why marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 












 

vii. Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. 
The Applicant must identify the relevant norm and explain why 
marking would violate that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 






 


viii. Conflict with international law. The Applicant must identify the 
applicable international law violated by the marking. 






 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and 
reasonableness and will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The 
Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the above information is adequately 
included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 
Applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the Applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any 
approved exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant 
or cooperative agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless 
provided otherwise. 


 

3.2.3.10 Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for Recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 
CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award 
without the explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities 
and services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the 
authorized geographic code specified in Section B.5 of this NOFO and must meet 
the source and nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

3.2.3.11 Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 

 

1. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

a. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an Applicant 
organization or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an 
Agency official involved in the competitive award decision-making process 
that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of 
interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal 
considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, 
the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or Recipient employee. 

 

b. The Applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits 
an SF-424. If the Applicant discovers a previously undisclosed conflict of 
interest after submitting the application, the Applicant must disclose the 





conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days following 
discovery. 




 

2. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The Applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of 
interest that they are aware of that may provide the Applicant with an unfair 
competitive advantage in competing for this financial assistance award. 
Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not limited to 
situations in which an Applicant or the Applicant’s employee gained access 
to non-public information regarding a federal assistance funding 
opportunity, or an Applicant or Applicant’s employee was substantially 
involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. 
USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the Applicant. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 


 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. CRITERIA 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this NOFO 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

USAID/Ghana will evaluate technical and other factors relative to each other, as described here 
and prescribed by the Concept Paper/Technical Application Format. The Concept Papers and 
Technical Applications will be scored by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria 
described in this section. 

 

 2. TECHNICAL REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 

This is a multi-tiered NOFO in accordance with ADS 303.3.6.1(c). Selection under this NOFO 
will be based on a two-step process: 

● Phase 1 - Concept Paper submissions: open to all eligible organizations as described in this 
NOFO. Concept papers will receive a PASS or FAIL rating depending on the results of the 
evaluation process according to the merit review criteria outlined below for this stage. 
Applicants who are not invited to proceed to Phase 2 will be notified. 

 

● Phase 2 - Full application submissions: by invitation only to applicants selected under Phase 
1 evaluation. 

Applicants must first submit a concept paper for review. All concept papers will be 
evaluated according to the criteria specified in this NOFO. If the concept is determined to 
warrant further evaluation per the selection criteria established, USAID will request a full 
application. In accordance with ADS 303.3.10.2 and 2 CFR 200.306, cost sharing will be 
used to break ties among full applications with equivalent scores after evaluation against all 
other factors. 

2.1 Merit Review Phase 1 - Concept Paper – Open to all eligible organizations 

The concept papers will be evaluated based on the following criterion: 

Does the concept paper demonstrate a high probability of achieving the objectives of the 
Strengthening Accountability in Ghana’s Education System (SAGES) Systems Strengthening 
Activity? 

2.2 Merit Review Phase 2 - Full Application – Open only to organizations selected in Phase 1 

USAID/Ghana will conduct merit reviews of all full applications from organizations invited from 
Phase 1 that comply with all requirements and instructions in this NOFO. The review and 
evaluation of full applications will be in accordance with the below criteria which are in descending 
order of importance. The sub-criteria under each Criterion are of equal importance. 


2.2.1 Criterion 1 – Technical Approach 

USAID/Ghana will evaluate the technical approach and year one work plan outline based on the 
extent to which they: 

a. are sound, evidenced-based, and likely to meet the Activity’s objectives and purpose as set 
forth in the NOFO. 

b. strengthen linkages between GOG actors at various levels in the education sector and 
improve learning outcomes. 

c. are appropriately contextualized, include a cohesive plan for coordinating and leveraging 
with USAID, other donor, and GOG programs operating in the accountability sphere, and 
include plans for meaningful engagement with local partners; and 

d. use a behavior-led approach and incorporate opportunities for learning and adapting. 

 2.2.2 Criterion 2 – Management and Staffing Plan and Key Personnel 

USAID/Ghana will evaluate the management and staffing plan and key personnel based on the 
extent to which: 

a. the Applicant demonstrates that named key personnel have the expertise to successfully 
achieve the objectives of the program description; 

b. the proposed management and staffing plan effectively supports the strategy presented to 
achieve the results in the Program Description; and 

c. the organizational structure delineates clear lines of supervision and communication, 
including any subawards. 

 

3. BUSINESS REVIEW 

USAID/Ghana will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

USAID/Ghana will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be included 
in the award. 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre- award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient has 
the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial resources, 
and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program 
and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk 


assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific 
conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 


A notice of award signed by the AO is the authorizing document. USAID will provide it to the 
selected Recipient electronically. Unsuccessful Applicants will be notified. 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this RFA cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

2. ADMINISTRATIVE AND NATIONAL POLICY REQUIREMENTS 


The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the 
following policies and regulations. 

For US organizations: ADS 303 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for 
U.S. Non-governmental organizations. 

For Non-US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard 
Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

For Public International Organizations: ADS 308 and Standard Provisions for Cost-
Type Agreements with Public International Organizations (PIOs)This NOFO only 
contains provisions that are required at this stage. Final provisions will be incorporated 
in the final award as applicable to the selected Recipient. 

 

3. PLANS AND REPORTING 


 

The recipient must adhere to all reporting requirements listed below. All plans and reports 
must be submitted in English. Documents must be submitted electronically by email by the 
due date for review by the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) designated by the AO. 
The AO and designated Acquisition & Assistance Specialist must be copied on each 
submission. 

 

 3.1 Plans 

 

3.1.1 Annual Work Plan - Within 60 calendar days of the effective date of the award, 
the recipient must submit the first annual work plan covering the period from the 
effective date through September 30, 2023. It must build on the draft outline of the Year 
One Work Plan submitted with the recipient’s application. Subsequent work plans will 
cover the period October 1 to September 30 of the following year and must be submitted 
by August 15 of each year. The AOR will review the work plan and provide written 


comments to the recipient. The recipient must finalize the work plan no later than 15 
calendar days after receipt of the AOR’s written comments. Approved work plans may be 
revised with AOR written approval on an as needed basis to reflect unforeseen 
adjustments in implementation. 

 

In addition to the submission of the electronic copy of the annual work plans described 
above, the recipient must present the plan to the AOR and other interested USAID staff 
on an annual basis. This presentation will be held in or around October of each year and 
organized in collaboration with the AOR. 

 

The Work Plan will include: 

 

● Key activities, proposed accomplishments, and expected progress towards 
achieving planned results and performance targets tied to the MEL Plan. 
● Timeline for implementation of the year’s proposed activities, including target 
completion dates. 
● Information on how activities will be implemented and supervised. 
● Personnel requirements to achieve expected outcomes. 
● Major commodities and equipment to be procured when applicable. 
● Details of collaboration with other major partners and other USAID/USG projects 
and activities. 
● Details of steps to ensure sustainability of activities. 
● Planned short-term and long-term technical assistance (STTA/LTTA). 
● Summary spend plan (budget) by month; and 
● Activity Fact Sheets. 


 

3.1.2 Monitoring, Evaluation & Learning (MEL) Plan: Within 90 days of the 
effective date of the award, the recipient must submit a MEL plan to the AOR for 
approval. The MEL plan must cover the full period of the Cooperative Agreement and 
must include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 

● Description of how the recipient will monitor program interventions, measure 
results, ensure data quality, and use data to inform on-going activities. 
● Description of how data will be collected, disaggregated, stored, and analyzed. 
● List of the indicators to be used to measure achievement of the results. 
● Description of the method of data collection to be used to obtain the indicator 
data; and 
● A Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) Plan, which will establish a plan 
and agenda for robust CLA (including program questions and evidence gaps) 
https://usaidlearninglab.org/qrg/understanding-cla-0 


 


The recipient’s activity MEL plan must ensure that USAID/Ghana indicators are tracked 
and reported on, to include relevant CDCS and other indicators, as identified in 
USAID/Ghana’s Performance Management Plan (PMP). Other required indicators, such 
as standard foreign assistance indicators, to support USAID/Ghana’s annual reporting 
must also be included as part of the activity’s MEL Plan. Illustrative indicators for 
reporting include the following: 

 

● Number of education administrators and officials who complete professional 
development activities with USG assistance (ES. 1-12). 
● Number of educators who complete professional development activities with 
USG assistance (ES. 1-6). 
● Percent of head teachers who attend schools daily in USG-supported schools. 
● Education system strengthened through USG-assisted policy reform (ES. 1-59) 
● Number of PTAs or community-based school governance structures engaged in 
primary and secondary education supported with USG assistance. (ES. 1-13) 


 

The AOR will review the draft MEL plan and provide written comments/suggestions to 
the recipient. The recipient must finalize the plan no later than 15 days from receipt of the 
AOR’s written comments/suggestions. The MEL plan may be revised only with AOR 
written approval. 

 

3.1.3 Close-out/Demobilization Plan: 

 

Six months prior to the completion date of the award, the recipient must submit a close-
out/demobilization plan to the AO with a copy to the AOR. The close-out plan must 
describe, at a minimum and as applicable, including how the recipient will complete the 
following: 

● Manage the final months of the award, 
● Ensure retention of needed staff and appropriate phase-out of other staff, 
● Ensure all activities are successfully completed, 
● Physical close-out of offices, 
● Disposition of property, 
● Closeout of subawards, and 
● Completion of final performance, financial, and other reports. 


 

3.1.4 Communications and Outreach Plan 

Within 60 days of award, the recipient must submit a Communications and Outreach 
(C&O) Plan for USAID review and approval. The C&O Plan must explain how the 
recipient will create and implement a variety of appropriate outreach and 
communications tools and platforms to i) raise public awareness, understanding, and 


support for the Activity; ii) help advance the Activity’s programmatic objectives; and iii) 
contribute to knowledge management, including through close coordination with the 
AMELP. The recipient will also include an annual Communications Calendar noting key 
elements and activities warranting public information and outreach activities. The C&O 
Plan must identify the audience (primary and secondary), format, schedule, and purpose 
of all internal and external communications products. It must include plans for 
submission of Success Stories across the period of performance. 

The C&O Plan must include a narrative section describing the strategic purpose for each 
outreach tool not listed among the required reports. Additionally, the C&O Plan must 
include a section describing the resource needs for each communications product, to 
ensure adequate planning and execution of the plan to produce high-quality, timely, 
succinct, and effective communications tools. The Plan must also describe how it 
articulates and complements the AMELP. 

The draft C&O Plan will be refined jointly with the AOR and USAID’s Development 
Outreach and Communications Specialists. The C&O Plan must align with the Branding 
Implementation Plan and Marking Plan, which describes how the recipient will 
communicate to beneficiaries and stakeholder audiences that the work of this agreement 
is from the American people per the Branding Strategy and USAID Branding Guidelines 
(see https://www.usaid.gov/branding ). 

 

3.2 Reports 

 

3.2.1 Financial Reporting 

 

The recipient must submit quarterly financial reports using the SF-425 Federal Financial 
Reporting form available at Federal Financial Report | GSA. The recipient will send the 
completed SF-425 by e-mail to the AOR and copy the AO and the USAID/West Africa 
Regional Financial Management Office (RFMO) at accra-cont@usaid.gov, within 30 
calendar days following the end of each USAID quarter. 

 

Reports are due as noted below: 

Reporting Quarter SF-425 Due Date 

January 1 – March 31 April 30 

April 1 – June 30 July 31 

July 1 – September 30 October 31 

October 1 – December 31 January 31 

 

The recipient must submit the Final Financial Report within 90 days after the end of the 
activity. If the recipient has a Letter of Credit with the US government, the recipient must 


submit a copy of the “Final” Federal Financial Report (FFR/SF-425) report for this award 
to the USAID LOC Team at locfinalreport@usaid.gov. 

 

3.2.2 Performance Reporting - The recipient must submit quarterly performance reports 
30 calendar days after the end of the reporting period (as noted above for Financial 
Reporting). 

 

Content for Performance reports will comply with 2 CFR 200.329. 

 

Annual Reports – The fourth quarterly report will be replaced by the Annual Performance 
Report and will be due on October 1 of each year. 

 

3.2.3 Final Performance Report - A Final Performance Report is required within 90 
days of the expiration of the Cooperative Agreement. The Final Performance Report 
should include the following: 

● An Executive Summary describing the project, overall accomplishments, lessons 
learned, and conclusions about future assistance needs. 
● Overall description of the project and activities implemented. 
● Description of overall achievements and results during the life of the project. 
● Assessment of progress made in achieving the project’s goal, objectives, and 
expected results. 
● Any shortcomings or difficulties encountered, and reasons why expected results 
were not met, if applicable. 
● Summary of MEL Plan indicator results and an assessment of indicators’ relative 
usefulness in tracking project progress. 
● Summary of key findings from internal evaluations and assessments. 
● Summary of learning activities, including progress made in responding to key 
research questions around critical knowledge gaps in the learning agenda. 
● Changes in the project environment over the course of implementation. 
● Changes in project design and implementation, as well as summary of adaptive 
management approaches applied. 
● Summary of lessons learned. 
● Recommendations regarding unfinished work, if applicable; and 
● Recommendations relevant to future project design and implementation. 


 

The Final Performance Report must also include a list of all reports, publications, 
evaluations, and information and media products produced under this agreement, as well 
as confirmation that all products were submitted to the USAID Development Experience 
Clearinghouse (DEC). 

 


4. PROGRAM INCOME 

Any program income generated under the award will be added to USAID funding and used for 
program purposes. 

 

5. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include 

environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. 

 

This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 
/https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/201.pdf) and 
/https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/204.pdf) , which, in part, require that the 
potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 

 

USAID/Ghana conducted an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for four education sector 
activities encompassing 5 intervention categories: 

 

● Intervention Category 1. Policy advocacy and technical assistance to national 
government institutions to improve education policy implementation and strengthen 
school management strengthening 
● Intervention Category 2. Capacity building with district education authorities and 


communities to improve delivery of quality education services 

● Intervention Category 3. Distribution and promotion of instructional material 
● Intervention Category 4. Support improvement of school operations and data 


management systems 

● Intervention Category 5. Capacity building with private sector partners to strengthen 
school financing. 


 

The activities under the Ghana Education Portfolio 2020 - 2025 are among the classes of actions 
listed in 22 CFR 216.2(c)(2) and have no foreseeable direct or indirect adverse effect on the 
environment. Therefore, a Categorical Exclusion is approved. 

 

If the recipient proposes interventions outside of the above categories, those interventions are 
subject to an environmental analysis and the appropriate documentation prepared and approved, 
whether it be a new Request for Categorical Exclusion, an amendment, or other type of 22 CFR 
216 document. 

 


Climate change risks to the Ghana Education Portfolio of activities are rated low to moderate. 
Potential risks to activities include risks to the logistics networks necessary to host policy 
advocacy and technical assistance activities, risks to staff, participants, and other personnel, and 
risks to the necessary utilities and telecommunications infrastructure needed for anticipated 
activities. Two recommended actions to address these risks include 1) designing policy advocacy 
and technical assistance activities to be adaptable to changing climate conditions and to 
incorporate climate resilience across various conditions, and 2) including specific language on 
climate risk screening and management in any contracts or Subawards. 

 

To reduce COVID-19 transmission during the implementation of SAGES activities, recipients 
must ensure all activities addressed by this IEE adhere to current, applicable COVID-19 
guidelines. Refer to the AFR COVID-19 PIEE (attached and linked here 
https://ecd.usaid.gov/document.php?doc_id=52754 for links to U.S. and international guidance 
on appropriate measures to reduce COVID-19 transmission. Such measures may include, but are 
not limited to social distancing, use of personal protective equipment, limiting the size of 
gatherings and travel, and effective disinfection. 

 

USAID has developed a “COVID-19 GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTING PARTNERS “page 
on its website: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/resources-for-partners/covid-19-guidance-
implementing-partners. The recipient should ensure its staff/consultants and any sub awardee 
staff/consultants have appropriate training, authorization, and resources to meet the expectations 
of the applicable guidance while implementing these activities. 

 

6. GENDER CONSIDERATIONS 

 

Promoting gender equality and advancing the status of all women and girls around the world is 
vital to achieving U.S. foreign policy and development objectives. As part of the design of any 
proposed activity, the recipient will assess, identify, and ensure the proposed program addresses 
gender issues which impact the participation of men and women. 

 

Refer to USAID ADS 205 found at https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200/205 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/205.pdf for more information on integrating 
this policy into the applicant’s approach. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

1. The points of contact for this NOFO and any questions during the award process 
is as follows: 


 

Taniece Owusu 

Supervisory Agreement Officer (acting) 

U.S Agency for International Development 

U.S Embassy, Ghana Accra 

No. 24 Fourth Circular Road, Cantonments, 

P.O. Box 1630 Accra, Ghana 

Email: tbaldwinowusu@usaid.gov 

Nathan Strand 
Agreements Officer 

U.S Agency for International Development 

U.S Embassy, Ghana Accra 

No. 24 Fourth Circular Road, Cantonments, 

P.O. Box 1630 Accra, Ghana 

Email: nstrand@usaid.gov 

Ruth Amegashie 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

U.S Agency for International Development 

U.S Embassy, Ghana Accra 

No. 24 Fourth Circular Road, Cantonments, 

P.O. Box 1630 Accra, Ghana 

Email: ramegashie@usaid.gov 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in 
USAID’s acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource 
for all organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this 
page for additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-
assistance-ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

1. USAID RIGHTS 


USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The 
Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the 
expenditure of public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be 
subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

2. APPLICATIONS WITH PROPRIETARY DATA 


Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose 
or used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose should mark the cover page 
with the following: 

“This application includes data that must not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, 
however, an award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission 
of this data, the U.S. Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose 
the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This restriction does not limit 
the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained 
from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the 
following: 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the 
title page of this application.” 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 


 

 

ANNEX 1 – BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

 

An attachment is included in the NOFO in Excel format (.xsls) for the applicant to complete. 

 

[END OF ANNEX 1] 

 

 


 

ANNEX 2 – ACCOUNTABILITY FOR LEARNING FRAMEWORK 

 

 PLEASE NOTE: 

The attached document entitled "ACCOUNTABILITY FOR LEARNING FRAMEWORK " is an 

internal document of the Ghana Ministry of Education and not a public document. This is a draft 
document and is proprietary to the Ministry of Education and is not approved for use other than 
informational purposes for this NOFO. It is to assist the applicant to better understand the needs of 
the Ghana Ministry of Education and not be reproduced or used in any other form than to respond to 
this 

NOFO. 

 

[END OF ANNEX 2] 


