 

Issuance Date: September 8, 2020 

Deadline for Questions: September 21, 2020 by 12:00 NN Manila Local Time 

Application Closing Date and Time: October 19, 2020 by 12:00 NN Manila Local Time 

 

 

Subject: NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY (NOFO) NUMBER 
72049220RFA00003 

 

Program Title: Sustainable Coastal Fisheries Management Activity in the Pacific 
Region 

 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified U.S. and Non-U.S. non-profit or for-profit Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs), and other qualified non-U.S. organizations to implement a 
project entitled “Sustainable Coastal Fisheries Management.” Eligibility for this award is not 
restricted. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet the eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted 
at www.grants.gov, and may be amended. Potential applicants should regularly check the 
website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Applicants will need to have available or download Adobe program to their 
computers in order to view and save the Adobe forms properly. It is the responsibility of the 
applicant to ensure that the entire NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety and 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the Merit Review Criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly and from beginning to end to understand the type of program sought, 
application submission requirements and selection process. This NOFO will utilize a two-phased 
process. The result of this NOFO is expected to be one (1) award, although USAID reserves the 
right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. 

 

USAID will not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed below. The 
registration process may take many weeks to complete; therefore, Applicants are encouraged to 
begin registration early in the process. 


 

Any questions concerning this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the point(s) of contact 
identified in Section D.1. The deadline for questions is shown above. Responses to the questions 
received by the cut-off date and time will be made available to all applicants through an 
amendment to this NOFO which will be posted in www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government 
nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in the preparation and 
submission of an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant. All 
preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

Ethan Takahashi 

Agreement Officer 

Regional Office of Acquisition and Assistance 

 

 

 

 

 


Table of Contents 

 
SECTION A – PROGRAM DESCRIPTION.............................................................................................................. 4 
SECTION B – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ........................................................................................ 17 
SECTION C – ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION .................................................................................................... 20 
SECTION D – APPLICATION and SUBMISSION INFORMATION ........................................................ 23 
SECTION E – APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ............................................................................ 39 
SECTION F – FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ........................................... 44 
SECTION G – FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) .............................................................. 55 
SECTION H – OTHER INFORMATION ................................................................................................................. 56 
Annex 1 - INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) ............................................................... 58 



SECTION A – PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

A.1 AUTHORITY 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

A.1.a Title 

 

The activity will be entitled as part of the application process described below. 

 

A.1.b Summary 

 

This five-year Sustainable Coastal Fisheries Management Activity in the Pacific Region seeks to 
address the drivers of illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing that are degrading 
coastal fisheries and biodiversity and negatively impacting local livelihoods, food stability, and 
maritime security. Through this cooperative agreement, the United States Agency for 
International Development, Pacific Islands (USAID/Pacific Islands) looks to co-develop an 
activity to support sustainable coastal fisheries and protection of associated coastal and marine 
ecosystems in the Pacific Islands Region. While the primary focus is on coastal fisheries, this 
activity considers the ecological connection of coastal and oceanic fisheries and thus seeks 
solutions to challenges of IUU fishing across the Pacific. 

 

This activity will support the overall development goal of increasing the self-reliance of Pacific 
Island partners. At the penultimate level, this activity will improve the quality of life for Pacific 
Islanders by increasing ecosystem services and resilience at both the ecosystem and community 
level. This will be done in connection with ensuring a free and open environment for the people 
of the Pacific Islands, and the implementation of safeguards to secure the natural capital 
associated with their coastal marine resources. Integrating private sector partners, civil society 
organizations (CSO), and various levels of governmental stakeholders will ensure long-term 
success of the program and a way to establish and foster partnerships within and between Pacific 
communities to reach this goal. 

 

A.2 PROBLEM ANALYSIS AND OVERVIEW 

 

A.2.a Geographical Context 

 

USAID partner Pacific Island Countries (PICs) consists of 12 sovereign nations: 1) Federated 
States of Micronesia (FSM); 2) Fiji; 3) Kiribati; 4) Nauru; 5) Palau; 6) Papua New Guinea 
(PNG); 7) Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI); 8) Samoa; 9) Solomon Islands; 10) Tonga; 
11) Tuvalu; and 12) Vanuatu. These PICs are broken down into the three sub-regions of 


NOFO No.72049220RFA00003SustainableCoastalFisheries ManagementActivityIn the Pacific Region

Melanesia, Micronesia,and Polynesia1. Given thevast distances and number of countries in thePacific Region, and for the purposes of this activity, USAID is considering a geographic focus in 
the sub regions of Micronesia and Melanesia. In Micronesia, the countries of the Federated 
States of Micronesia, the MarshallIslands, and Palau are of interest; forMelanesia,the countriesare PapuaNewGuinea, the Solomon Islands, and Vanuatuare also of interest. These countriesall have historic ties to the United States as well as productive fisheries and significantbiodiversity.

The region that contains the PICs is a large area of the Pacific Ocean that isimportant for globalstability and trade, economics, shipping, and fisheries. In particular, fisheries in theregion 
supply a large portion ofthe global fish trade on Earth2, which underpin many of the livelihoodsfound for people within the region,and theGlobal Domestic Product (GDP) forthose nations3. 
The PICs identify as the“Blue Pacific” together to highlight the importance of the economic and 
natural resources linkages.Being the nations that make up Oceania in the Pacific Ocean, the 
Blue Pacific group nomenclature provides a shared vision for leadership within the region and 
leverages the multiple smaller nation states into a collective unit. The PICsvision for the region 
is one of peace, harmony, security, social inclusion, and prosperity, so thatall Pacific peoplecan 
lead free, healthy, and productive lives4.This is mirrored by theU.S. Government’s goal for afree, open, and independent Pacific region.

A.2.bCoastal Fisheries
Fisheries drive Pacificeconomies and serveas the backbone offood security in the region. 
Thesefisheries within the variousExclusiveEconomic Zones(EEZs)of the PICscan begenerally considered to be pelagic orcoastally oriented. In the pelagic context, waters of PICssupply some 34 percent of the global tuna catch each year5. Coastal fisheries are generallysmaller in volume than their pelagiccounterparts678, and typically have lower total internationalrevenueswhen compared topelagic fisheriesfor highly migratory species like tuna. However, 
these coastal fisheries still provide annual revenues valued at approximately $272 million forPICs9. 

Donor agenciesand partnershave already startedto take a multi-pronged approach to advance 
community-based and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management.The data-poor, 
undervalued, and underappreciated coastal fisheries sector is often exploited unsustainably froma number ofvariousactors10. The rapid economicgrowth of Asian nationsand accompanying 

1McKnight,T.L., 1995.Oceania: Thegeographyof Australia,New Zealand, and the Pacific Islands. EnglewoodCliffs: Prentice Hall.
2Gillet, R., 2016. Fisheriesin the Economiesof Pacific IslandCountries andTerritories. Noumea, New Caledonia:Pacific Community.
3Badjeck, M.C., Allison,E.H.,Halls, A.S. andDulvy,N.K., 2010. Impacts ofclimate variability and change onfishery-based

livelihoods.Marine policy,34(3), pp.375-383.4https://www.forumsec.org/pacific-regionalism/
5http://www.spc.int/updates/news/2019/12/healthy-tuna-stocks-in-the-pacific-pave-the-way-for-strategic-sustainable6Lowe, M.K.,Quach, M.M., Brousseau, K.R. and Tomita, A.S., 2016. Fishery Statisticsofthe Western Pacific.Pac Islands FishSci Cent

Admin Rep.,Volume 297Lowe, M.K.,Quach, M., Brousseau, K.R.,Tomita,A.S.andMatthews, T.E., 2016.FisheryStatistics of the Western Pacific, Pac Islands Fish

Sci Cent Admin Rep.Volume 30.8Lowe, M.K., Quach, M., Brousseau, K.R., Tomita, A.S. and Matthews, T.E., 2016. Fishery Statisticsofthe Western Pacific, Pac Islands Fish

Sci Cent Admin Rep.Volume 31=.
9https://fame1.spc.int/en/publications/roadmap-a-report-cards10Palomares, M.L., Froese, R., Derrick,B., Nöel, S.L., Tsui, G., Woroniak, J. and Pauly, D., 2018. Apreliminary global assessmentof thestatus

of exploited marine fish and invertebrate populations.

Page 5of 58


NOFO No.72049220RFA00003SustainableCoastalFisheries ManagementActivityIn the Pacific Region

increased demand for seafood further threatenscoastal fisheries11. Illegal and illicit activitieswill continue to thrive among weak country-level institutions, and weak regional institutions will 
perpetuate the ineffective management of these important resources12. 

Coastal fisheries are also important for food security and livelihoods within the PICs. Coastalfisheries supply up to 90 percent of the animal-sourced protein consumed in Pacifichouseholds13. Due to the sparsely populated and limited landmassesof PICs, a majority ofPacificIslanders live within the coastal zoneand rely heavily on coastalfisheries for daily food 
and livelihoods. The geography and remoteness of the PICs limitseconomic opportunities;
coastal fisheries become a local livelihood that is easy to access, providesfood security, and isbased on the cultural knowledge and lifestyle of the PacificIslands peoples14.

The Pacific region’s dispersed land among its vast waters pose many challenges for fisheriesmanagement.Fisheries governance is characterized by weak and uneven institutional capacity to 
undertake sound planning, enforce managementmeasures, and engage with stakeholders15. 
Weak institutions perpetuate ineffectivemonitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS)of fisheriesthat disadvantages legitimate businesses.Poor governance systems and the lack of incentives forlegal and sustainable seafood drive unsustainable fishing16. Loss of primary natural resourcesthrough lack of safeguards on fisheries and otherliving marine resources (LMRs)directlyimpacts livelihoods, local community resilience, and the economic stability of national 
governments within the PICs.

While the Pacificcontributes significantly to the world’s seafood production, illegal, unreported,
and unregulated (IUU) fishing has devastating effects on the overall health of the region’sfisheries and biodiversity. The problem depressesthe contribution of fisheries to the region’seconomic growth and posesthreats to maritime security17. This increase inIUU also directlycompetes with food security for PacificIslandersand community resilience. The PICsface the 
double burdenof malnutrition with a high prevalence ofnutrition-related diseases such asdiabetes, obesity, heart diseases, and some cancers18. Micronutrient deficiencies fromlack ofprotein intake is now prevalent among a number of the PICs where their coastalnatural resourcesare being exploited by IUUand other business practices that do not operate sustainably.

IUU fishing is a major challenge in Pacificfisheries. It is extremely difficult to have accurateestimates on the quantity and value ofIUU fishing in the region and determine the extent of its 
economic, social and environmental impacts17. While IUU fishing is problematic to detect whenit happens on the high seas, IUU fishing practicesalso happen in coastal fisheries where it is

11Dey, M.M., Garcia, Y.T., Praduman, K., Piumsombun, S., Haque, M.S., Li, L., Radam, A., Senaratne, A., Khiem, N.T. and Koeshendrajana, 
S., 2008. Demand for fish in Asia: a cross‐country analysis.Australian Journalof Agriculturaland Resource Economics,52(3), pp.321-338.12Walton, G.W.and Dinnen, S., 2019.The Pacific Islands: politics,organised crime and corruption. InHandbook ofOrganised Crime andPolitics. Edward Elgar Publishing.
13Foodand Agriculture Organization of theUnitedNations. 2012. The state of world fisheriesand aquaculture. FAO, Rome.
14Bell, J.D.,M. Kronen, A. Vunisea, W.J. Nash, G.Keeble, A. Demmke, S. Pontifex,and S. Andréfoue¨t.2009.Planning the useof fish for food

securityin the Pacific. Marine Policy33:64–76.15Chuenpagdee, R. and Jentoft, S.,2018. Transformingthegovernanceof small-scale fisheries.Maritime Studies,17(1), pp.101-115.16Hanich, Q. and Tsamenyi,M.,2009.Managing fisheriesand corruptioninthe Pacific Islands region.MarinePolicy,33(2), pp.386-392.17Pacific, M.A.,2016. Towards the quantificationofillegal,unreported and unregulated (IUU)fishing in the Pacific Islands region. In101pp.

Report forthe Pacific Islands ForumFisheries Agency (FFA) DevFish IIProject.
18Peng, W., Mu, Y., Hu, Y., Li, B., Raman, J. and Sui, Z., 2019. Double BurdenofMalnutritionin the Asia-Pacific Region—A Systematic 
Review and Meta-analysis.Journalof Epidemiologyand Global Health.

Page 6of 58


NOFO No.72049220RFA00003SustainableCoastalFisheries ManagementActivityIn the Pacific Region

difficult to detect because the resource users are varied and geographicallydispersed19. There 
are also incidences of illegal intrusion of foreign vessels into Pacific coastal waters suchas the 
Vietnamese “blue boats” in Palau, Micronesia, PNG, and New Caledonia20. IUU fishing 
translates to loss of government income that could otherwise be used for development services. 
One example has been the overharvesting and poaching of seacucumbers in many Pacific 
countries21, with a majority of those destined forAsian markets, particularly within China22. 
IUU fishing undermineslocal livelihoods and leads to food insecurity while also directly 
undermining stability and security.

A.2.cBiodiversity
Pacific marine diversity is some of the highest in the world and contributes to the naturalresource security necessary for the PICs.Pacific waters house some of the most extensive anddiverse reef systems in the world, including the CoralTriangle,an area with the earth’s greatestmarine biodiversity23. These extensive reef systems are connected to the coastal mangroves andseagrassareas to providean interconnected area of high biodiversity that supports vibrant coastalfisheries24. Several threats to the important biodiversity of the PICs exist, including IUU fishing, 
eutrophication, port-activity,and sea surface temperature.

With increasing IUU fishing, the primary threat isto fish stocks that are thetarget of removal foreither illegal markets orfrom unsustainable pressure. Some of the methods used in IUU fishing 
also present other direct risks to biodiversity in the marine environment. The use of certainfishing gear (e.g., gill nets, trawls) is indiscriminate and has high bycatch levels that limit thecatch effectiveness of the fishery as well as degrading the biodiversity overall25. Forcoastal andreefareas in particular, some destructive methods used in IUU fishing (e.g., 
explosives/dynamite, cyanide, beam trawls) notonly remove marine life from the environmentbut damage the structure of the reefs themselves25. 

The main nutrients associated with biological productivity in marine systems are nitrates,
phosphates,and silicates.Variations in the supply of nutrients have been observed in the world’soceans over the last several years.As human populations increase, human-induced nutrientloading also increases,and these originate from point and non-point sources2627. Point sourcesinclude human generated waste-water effluents, while nonpoint sources are usually associated 
with diffuse entry through land-use practices, such as agriculture, and coastal mining. Increasing 

19Lestari, D.I., Putra, A.R. and Larasuci, A.Y., 2020. The main consequencesof continuedillegal, unreported, andunregulated(IUU) fishingwithin Indonesian waters for maritime security actors and coastal communities.Research, Society andDevelopment,9(1), p.24911566.20Song, A.M., Hoang, V.T., Cohen, P.J., Aqorau, T. andMorrison, T.H., 2019. ‘Blue boats’ and ‘reef robbers’: Anew maritime security threatfor the Asia Pacific?.Asia PacificViewpoint,60(3), pp.310-324.21Carleton, C., Hambrey, J., Govan, H., Medley, P. andKinch, J., 2013. Effective managementof sea cucumber fisheriesandthebeche-de-mer 

trade inMelanesia.SPCFisheries Newsletter,140(24-42).
22Conand,C., 2017. Expansion of globalsea cucumberfisheries buoys exports.Revistade Biología Tropical,65(1-1), pp.S1-S10.23Hoeksema, B.W., 2007. Delineation of the Indo-Malayan centreof maximum marine biodiversity: the Coral Triangle. InBiogeography, time, 

andplace:distributions, barriers, and islands(pp. 117-178). Springer, Dordrecht.
24Dorenbosch, M., Grol, M.G.G., Christianen, M.J.A., Nagelkerken, I. and Van Der Velde, G., 2005. Indo-Pacific seagrass beds andmangrovescontributeto fish density and diversityon adjacent coral reefs.Marine Ecology Progress Series,302, pp.63-76.25Lampe, M., Demmalino, E.B., Neil, M. andJompa, J., 2017. Main Drivers And Alternative Solutions For Destructive Fishing In SouthSulawesi-Indonesia: Lessons Learned From Spermonde Archipelago, TakaBonerate, And Sembilan Island.Sci. Int. Lahore,29, pp.159-67.26Duprey, N.N., Yasuhara, M. andBaker, D.M., 2016.Reefs oftomorrow:eutrophication reduces coral biodiversityin anurbanizedseascape.Globalchange biology,22(11), pp.3550-3565.27Miyajima,T., Morimoto, N., Nakamura, T., Yamamoto, T., Watanabe, A. andNadaoka, K., 2016.Atmospheric deposition ofreactive nitrogenas a regional-scale eutrophication stress onthe coral reef ecosystem. InCoral Reef Science(pp. 95-101). Springer, Tokyo.

Page 7of 58


NOFO No.72049220RFA00003SustainableCoastalFisheries ManagementActivityIn the Pacific Region

these sources of nutrients results in eutrophication that can lead to hypoxicor anoxic areas. 
These “dead-zones”canresult in high mortality for all life in the area, particularly sessileorganisms associated with reefs28. 

The PacificIslands region has a high volume of movement related to shipping, fishing, and 
transit vessel activity.Given the increasing interconnected nature of PICsand futuredevelopment in the region, these activities are expected to increase over thecoming decades.
This gives rise to both ship-based and oil-based pollution concerns29. Moreover, the emptying ofballast water tanksfromcertain ships could introduce specieswhich are harmful to the balanceof many of the endemic reefs in the Pacific Islands region30. 

Water temperature is a major component of species distributions in the marine environment. 
This affects both the abundanceand the distribution. With warming water and increasing ocean 
acidification, there is increasing coral bleachingevents that threaten the survival of these 
important ecosystems31. The changing patterns of oceanographic currents from strongerpycnoclines also limits potential recruitment andmay limit the ability of certain ecosystemsandreefs to bringenough new genetic material which would limit diversity over time32. These 
effects work together or independently to potentially limit the resilience of the diverseecosystems of the Pacific Islands.

A.2.dClimate Change
The unique developmentcontext of the PICs places them on the front lines of a variety ofworldwide challenges, the most important of which is climate change. PICs articulated in theBoe Declaration that climate change is the single greatest threat to their security.33In August2019, PICs reaffirmed that climate and disasterresilience is their top priority to securing thefuture of the Blue Pacific. PICs also identified the protection of the Pacific Ocean’s health andintegrity and sustainablemanagement of island and ocean resources to be ofhigh priorityfor 
securing their future. 

Climate change significantly affects communitiesof Pacific island nations,with impactsincluding sea level rise, bleaching of corals, loss of wetlands, flooding, erosion and 
endangerment of mangroves, among others34. Other marine impacts includerising ocean 
temperatures, changes in the El Nino Southern Oscillation, ocean acidification, and damage to 
corals, which areexpected to affect fish migration and abundance patterns and lead to a declinein fisheries production in tropical oceans and a decline in coastal protective capacity of island 
nations35.

28Altieri, A.H., Harrison, S.B., Seemann, J., Collin, R., Diaz,R.J. and Knowlton, N., 2017.Tropical deadzones andmassmortalities oncoral

reefs.Proceedingsof the National Academy of Sciences,114(14), pp.3660-3665.29Burke, L.M., Reytar, K., Spalding, M. and Perry, A., 2017. Reefsat risk revisited: WorldResources Institute.
30Saglam,H. andDuzgunes, E.,2018. Effect of Ballast Water onMarine Ecosystem. InExergyfor A Better Environmentand Improved

Sustainability 2(pp. 373-382). Springer, Cham.
31Rodgers, G.G., Donelson, J.M., McCormick,M.I. andMunday, P.L., 2018.Marine Biology,165(4), p.73.32Richmond, R.H., Tisthammer, K.H. and Spies, N.P., 2018. The effects ofanthropogenic stressorson reproduction and recruitment ofcorals

and reef.Frontiersin Marine Science,5, p.226.33https://www.forumsec.org/boe-declaration-on-regional-security/
34SIMCTA 2004, SMNREM2005, UNFCCC2011.

35Mimura 2007, FAO 2008

Page 8of 58


 

The effects on the natural resources under various climate scenarios for the PICs show a drastic 
reduction in those ecosystem services. For coastal fisheries, and primarily those that rely on the 
nearshore reef environments, productivity decreases up to 20% are expected by 205036. 
This is combined with increasing storm activity that could reduce the seagrass habitats that are 
essential for fisheries by as much as 35%
36. In terms 
of other coastal and nearshore fisheries, there are expected to be decreases in their distribution, 
size, and numbers37. Mangroves, that serve as nursery grounds for many fish species, under 
climate change projections in the PICs are expected to see losses of 50-70% by 2050 as well38. 

36 Bell, J.D., Cisneros-Montemayor, A., Hanich, Q., Johnson, J.E., Lehodey, P., Moore, B.R., Pratchett, M.S., Reygondeau, G., Senina, I., Virdin, 
J. and Wabnitz, C.C., 2018. Adaptations to maintain the contributions of small-scale fisheries to food security in the Pacific Islands. Marine 
Policy, 88, pp.303-314. 

37 Pratchett, M.S., Cameron, D.S., Donelson, J., Evans, L., Frisch, A.J., Hobday, A.J., Hoey, A.S., Marshall, N.A., Messmer, V., Munday, P.L. 
and Pears, R., 2017. Effects of climate change on coral grouper (Plectropomus spp.) and possible adaptation options. Reviews in Fish Biology 
and Fisheries, 27(2), pp.297-316. 

38 Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Andréfouët, S., Fabricius, K.E., Diaz-Pulido, G., Lough, J.M., Marshall, P.A. and Pratchett, M.S., 2011. Vulnerability of 
coral reefs in the tropical Pacific to climate change. Vulnerability of tropical Pacific fisheries and aquaculture to climate change, pp.251-296. 

39 SPREP 2005 

40 FAO 2008, UNFCCC 2011 

41 OXFAM 2009, Hiller-Garvey, 2010, ESCAP 2010. 

 

The Pacific region’s diverse island nations and territories are considered the most vulnerable in 
the world to climate change. Meanwhile, PICs experience a wide range of hazards, including 
typhoons, floods, drought, earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic eruptions. Pacific island 
economies depend primarily on tourism, fisheries, forestry and agriculture, all of which are 
highly exposed and sensitive to climate change and disasters. The Pacific Islands’ Framework 
for Action on Climate Change states that: “Reducing the risks associated with the impacts of 
extreme weather and climate variability…must be urgently addressed in order to contribute to 
improving livelihoods, economic well-being and health as well as maintaining biodiversity and 
culture”39. 

 

Many Pacific islands depend on fisheries as one of the main sources of their income, foreign 
exchange, and economic livelihood. Changes in climate are likely to hurt fisheries. With the 
importance of fish protein for food security, and a significant portion of these fishery resources 
coming from coral reefs, loss of food security from climate change is a real possibility for PICs 
in the coming years40. 

 

Tourism is a leading economic activity for many Pacific islands that is often based on natural 
ecosystems: coral reef exploration, boating, and fishing. The adverse effects of climate change 
pose serious threats to economic development and the livelihoods of citizens due to beach 
erosion, damage to coastal infrastructure, bleaching of coral reefs, and reduced access to 
freshwater sources.41 

 

A.2.e Cultural Context 

 

The Pacific region is composed of a broad range of human cultures and biodiverse marine 
ecosystems which are interrelated into complex socio-ecological systems with varying 
characteristics and contexts. The individual communities among the many islands of the Pacific 
Islands region utilize the marine environment and the resources therein for food security, 


NOFO No.72049220RFA00003SustainableCoastalFisheries ManagementActivityIn the Pacific Region

livelihoods, and cultural continuity42. This cultural reliance on the ocean has been a part of the 
cultural history and identity of these communities for centuries.These archipelago communitiesalso have traditional means and local customs on managing of their local marine resources43. 
This is particularly true for the small-scale artisanal fisheries comprising the near shore andcoastal areas.

Fisheries, particularly small-scale coastal resources, and the act of harvesting resources from the 
oceanare important to the socioculturaland heritage identities of local Pacific Islandcommunities.These resources are so entwined with the local culture that for many islands theyrepresent the primary source of protein, and fishing is primarily done for local consumption in 
most rural and coastal households, with high levels: 83% of the Solomon Islands, 35% ofVanuatu, 99% ofKiribati, and 87% of MarshallIslands44. Moreover, there is an ever-increasinggap between the amountoffish protein required for good nutrition to avoid health problems, and 
the amount harvestedfrom coastal fisheries45. These attributes mean the Pacific must beunderstood in terms of the hyperlocal context, with marine resources understood relative to thelocal communities that depend on those resources and have included that resource extraction as a 
part of their cultural identity.

A.2.fGender Considerations
The PICs face immense challenges in gender equality across multiple sectors, including theenvironment and naturalresources,this poses risk for development outcomes and for lasting 
program success. Gender Based Violence (GBV)levels in the region illustrate the low socialstatus of women, with rates ranging from 46% in Samoa to above 60% in PNG, Kiribati, and theSolomon Islands46. Coastal fisheries(i.e., invertebrates and finfish)collection efforts can 
involve up to 50% women in places like Papua NewGuinea47; and while women's role variesbetweenPICs,women account formore than 56% oftotal annual small-scale catcheswithanoverallimpact of 363 million USDon economies in the region48.Inall cases,women’scontributions are often underestimated and not fully acknowledged.

Women are in various roles within the fisheries sector and asa result havemajor contributions to 
the local economy and households49. The importance of addressing gender specific impacts forPICs in development outcomes for fisheries, biodiversity, and ecosystem services has been 
recognized since 2008atthe Pacific Islands Forum.Although women arean important part ofthe fisheries sector in the PICs, particularly in rural environments, there arestruggles in getting 
women’s work recognized.

42Kittinger, J.N.,2013. Human dimensions of small-scale andtraditional fisheriesin the Asia-Pacific region.Pacific Science,67(3), pp.315-325.43Kleiber, D. andLeong,K., 2018. Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center:Cultural Fishingin American Samoa.
44Charlton, K.E., Russell, J., Gorman, E., Hanich, Q., Delisle, A., Campbell, B. andBell, J., 2016. Fish, food security andhealth inPacific

Islandcountriesandterritories: a systematic literature review.BMC Public Health,16(1), p.285.45SPC.Fishand Food Security. PolicyBrief1/2008, Secretariatof the Pacific Community,Noumea, 2008.46Populationand Development Profiles; Pacific island Countries, UNFPA, Pacific Sub-regional Office, April2014.47Kronen, M. andVunisea,A.,2007. Women never hunt–but fish: Highlighting equality for women inpolicy formulationand strategicplanning

in the coastalfisheriessector inPacific Island countries.SPCWomen in Fisheries Information Bulletin,17, pp.3-15.48Harper, S., Zeller, D., Hauzer, M., Pauly, D. and Sumaila, U.R., 2013. Women and fisheries: Contributionto food securityandlocal 

economies.Marine policy,39, pp.56-63.49Ram-Bidesi, V.,2015.Recognizing the roleof womenin supporting marine stewardshipin the Pacific Islands.Marine Policy,59, pp.1-8.

Page 10of58


Depending on the fishery sector, women have varying roles and responsibilities. In commercial, 
organized fisheries, women typically are involved in shore-based processing facilities and men 
are more involved with offshore pelagic fisheries50. Women are often the most active players in 
the subsistence sector. They typically are involved with collecting fish close to their homes 
using simple, culturally relevant methods and techniques. This is done to provide for the daily 
food security of the home and community51. In these environments they are the regular suppliers 
of local marine resources that are not involved in economic markets. 

50 Sullivan, N. and Bidesi, V.R., 2008. Gender issues in tuna fisheries: Case studies in Papua New Guinea, Fiji and Kiribati. Forum Fisheries 
Agency & Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. 

51 Leney, A., Schwarz, A.M., Aalbersberg, B., Verheij, E., Ropeti, E., Petro, G., Tafea, H., Bertram, I., Pita, J., Aitaro, J. and Matawai, M., 
2011. Good coastal management practices in the Pacific: experiences from the field. SPREP. 

52 Vunisea, A., 2007. Women‟ s changing participation in the fisheries sector in Pacific. Island Countries. SPC Women in Fisheries Information 
Bulletin, 16, pp.24-27. 

 

Coastal fisheries in many PIC areas are structured around community-based resource 
management systems. These systems allow for collective decision making, but women are in 
primarily subordinate positions in society. This limits the expression of their equities in the 
fisheries sector and frequently the concerns and interests of women are not included in the 
decision-making process49. 
52. In the rural communities, where women have the majority of 
traditional knowledge about the artisanal fishery, this means that local knowledge that can be 
used to increase management outcomes largely remains outside of the management process

 

Gender equality and female empowerment are essential for achieving USAID’s development 
goals and underpinned by the Women’s Global Development and Prosperity (W-GDP) initiative. 
The W-GDP initiative goal is to advance global women’s economic empowerment focused on 
three pillars: women prospering in the workforce, women succeeding as entrepreneurs, and 
women enabled in the economy. The USAID Gender Policy advances equality between females 
and males and empowers women and girls to participate fully in and benefit from development, 
through the integration of gender in the entire project cycle -- from project planning and 
implementation to monitoring and evaluation. This integrated approach focuses on achieving 
three overarching outcomes: 1) Reducing gender disparities in access to, control over and benefit 
from resources, wealth, opportunities, and services – economic, social, political, and cultural; 2) 
Reducing gender based violence and mitigate its harmful effects on individuals and 
communities, so that all people can live healthy and productive lives; and 3) Increasing the 
capability of women and girls to realize their rights, determine their life outcomes, and influence 
decision making in households, communities, and societies. 

 

A.2.g Governance Challenges 

 

The governments of the PICs are primarily young democracies with different government 
structures depending on the culture and the legacy of former colonial rule. Although the 
challenges for the governmental structures in regulating and managing their marine resources, 
remain individual, there are some common themes that cut across all PICs. In fisheries, 
increasing the representation and voice of women, as well as ensuring vulnerable communities 
have voices in the democratic system remain of importance52. The distributed nature of the 
islands and low population densities make the importance of governmental transparency and 


accountability an important mechanism to successful management of marine resources for local 
communities and the nation state as a whole. 

 

Weak governmental and management institutions allow illicit and illegal activities, such as IUU, 
to continue in national EEZs. Either allowing through corruption, or through an inability to 
effectively provide the correct political, policy, and response options encourages further illegal 
and unregulated behavior related to fisheries that could limit and undermine the ability of the 
government to continue to grow their economy sustainably53. Moreover, the 2019 U.S. 
Department of State Trafficking in Persons Report has identified the PICs as source, transit, and 
destination for human trafficking related to forced labor for the fishing industry54; this may 
further be extended into trafficking for sexual exploitation or other human rights abuses. 

53 Hanich, Q. and Tsamenyi, M., 2009. Managing fisheries and corruption in the Pacific Islands region. Marine Policy, 33(2), pp.386-392. 

54 https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/2019-Trafficking-in-Persons-Report.pdf 

55 Mohanty, M., 2012. Informal social protection and social development in Pacific Island countries: role of NGOs and civil society. Asia-Pacific 
Development Journal, 18(2), pp.25-56. 

56 Ruddle, K., 1998. The context of policy design for existing community-based fisheries management systems in the Pacific Islands. Ocean & 
Coastal Management, 40(2-3), pp.105-126. 

57 Walsh, K.J., McInnes, K.L. and McBride, J.L., 2012. Climate change impacts on tropical cyclones and extreme sea levels in the South 
Pacific—A regional assessment. Global and Planetary Change, 80, pp.149-164. 

58 Plahe, J.K., Hawkes, S. and Ponnamperuma, S., 2013. The corporate food regime and food sovereignty in the Pacific Islands. The 
Contemporary Pacific, pp.309-338. 

59 Wilson, N., Mansoor, O., Lush, D. and Kiedrzynski, T., 2005. Modeling the impact of pandemic influenza on Pacific Islands. Emerging 
infectious diseases, 11(2), p.347. 

 

There is an extensive and active group of civil society organizations (CSOs) within the PICs, 
many of them faith-based, and tied to specific communities on certain islands. In times of 
disaster and in areas with limited governmental provided services, they often provide services 
and support to those local communities. Within the region, CSOs have a number of challenges, 
which include but are not limited to limited financial resources, human resources, and lack of 
coordination55. These CSOs often have limited capacity due to physical constraints such as 
location, equipment, and infrastructure, as well as soft resources like expertise, human capital, 
and logistical support. There is also a common theme of fragmentation associated with PICs 
CSOs as they tend to be very community or island specific and reflect the geographical 
distribution of these island nations56. This can directly limit effectiveness and reach and make 
interventions to strengthen CSOs a difficult concept. 

 

The activity will support USAID’s Biodiversity Code. It will have an explicit biodiversity 
objective, identify interventions based on an analysis of threats to biodiversity and a 
corresponding theory of change, positively impact biodiversity in biologically significant areas, 
and monitor indicators along the theory of change. 

 

A.2.h Regional Shocks and Stressors 

 

There are several potential shocks and stressors which have varying effects to the environment, 
economies, and communities of PICs, depending on the nature and severity of the stress. Some 
of these stressors, such as climate change, have a multitude of effects and are discussed in 
section A.2.d. Other shocks, such as tropical cyclones57, global trade58, or pandemics59 such as 
COVID-19, present challenges to small island developing states, and have particularly strong 
impacts for PICs due to the geography and isolation of the islands in the region. These shocks 


and stressors can have variable effects based on the location within the Pacific region, but also 
secondarily impact other PIC that may have not been directly impacted through increasing 
isolation or loss of trade. 

 

Natural disasters are prevalent within the Pacific region and threaten long-term resilience for 
PICs. Located within the Pacific “ring of fire” PICs face challenges from active tectonic 
movement ranging from volcanoes, earthquakes, and tsunamis that can cause severe disruption 
on both local (i.e., volcanic activity60) and regional level (i.e., earthquake61, tsunami62). Other 
natural disasters like typhoons63, threaten parts or whole sub-regions depending on their 
formation and track through the Pacific Ocean. All of these can have severe effects on the coastal 
marine environment, and particularly the fragile reef ecosystems near-shore. In particular, 
earthquakes, volcanoes, tsunamis, and typhoons can all cause direct mechanical damage to the 
reef and other nearshore environments64. Moreover, these events also directly impact the 
communities that rely on their local marine ecosystems for food security and livelihoods, both 
directly impacting their communities and limiting access to the natural resources. 

60 Carn, S.A., Fisher, B.L., Krotkov, N.A., Li, C. and Prata, F.J., 2018, December. Satellite Observations of SO2 Emissions from Pacific Island 
Eruptions in 2018. In AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. 

61 Johnson, K.L., Pagani, M., Styron, R.H. and Gee, R., 2019. Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Analysis for the southern Pacific 
Islands. AGUFM, 2019, pp.NH13D-0836. 

62 Itibita, B. and Chen, S., 2017, December. Integrating an alert technology into PIC social context: An earthquake-induced tsunami alert for 
Pacific Island Communities. In 2017 4th Asia-Pacific World Congress on Computer Science and Engineering (APWC on CSE) (pp. 149-153). 
IEEE. 

63 Ford, M., Merrifield, M.A. and Becker, J.M., 2018. Inundation of a low-lying urban atoll island: Majuro, Marshall Islands. Natural 
Hazards, 91(3), pp.1273-1297. 

64 Abesamis, R.A., Langlois, T., Birt, M., Thillainath, E., Bucol, A.A., Arceo, H.O. and Russ, G.R., 2018. Coral Reefs, 37(1), pp.81-97. 

65 Shanks, G.D., Wilson, N., Kippen, R. and Brundage, J.F., 2018. The unusually diverse mortality patterns in the Pacific region during the 1918– 
21 influenza pandemic: reflections at the pandemic's centenary. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 18(10), pp.e323-e332. 

66 McIntyre, A., Li, M.X., Wang, K. and Yun, H., 2018. Economic benefits of export diversification in small states. International Monetary Fund. 

67 Morgan, W., 2018. Much lost, little gained? Contemporary trade agreements in the Pacific Islands. The Journal of Pacific History, 53(3), 
pp.268-286. 

Communicable disease and pandemics present another potential shock and stress which very 
directly affects PIC, and the communities therein. Many of the communities throughout the 
region have historically had less interaction with the global community. This has limited 
immunity for certain diseases, and the isolated nature means that once introduced, pandemics can 
spread easily within the population65. These effects can directly limit the ability of local 
populations to engage in normal livelihoods tied to marine resource extraction, and limit 
effective management, monitoring, or control from government or community authorities. 

 

Limited economic diversification, and strong reliance on the ability of open markets for trade 
limits the resilience capabilities of many PICs66. With a primary underpinning of natural 
resources, such as fisheries and other marine natural resources, driving much of the local 
livelihoods and national GDP, changes in global trade and markets can have long-lasting and 
negative effects on nations within the region and their communities67. These economic shocks 
can cause increased pressure on local fisheries to supplement protein for food security or 
encourage IUU fishing from domestic or foreign actors looking to capitalize on high prices in 
illegal markets. 

 

The effects of shocks and stresses on the PIC is recognized by USAID. Using agency-wide goals 
of adaptive management and effective monitoring, evaluation, and learning plans allows for 


direct engagement during times of acute stress or to achieve programmatic goals with increasing 
or variable stressors to the region. 

 

A.3 Objectives and Results 

 

Fisheries sustainability, biodiversity conservation, and maritime security are interconnected 
development goals in the Pacific region. Overall, this activity will address the drivers that are 
degrading fisheries and biodiversity, and damaging livelihoods and food security. It will protect 
fisheries and biodiversity as a significant source of the region’s economic and maritime security 
with a focus on addressing IUU fishing. This five-year Sustainable Coastal Fisheries 
Management Activity in the Pacific Region seeks to address the drivers of IUU fishing that are 
degrading coastal fisheries and biodiversity and negatively impacting local livelihoods and 
maritime security. While the primary focus is on coastal fisheries, community-driven fisheries 
management is necessarily linked to broader national level application with clear roles and 
responsibilities between local level and national government management. 

 

This activity will achieve the following major results: 

 

1. Improvement of sustainable coastal fisheries management; 
2. Enhancement of monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS) in coastal fisheries; and 
3. Demonstration of sustainable supply chains and private sector partnerships. 


 

Results Framework 

 



Sustainable Coastal 
Fisheries Management 
Improved 

Monitoring, Control and 
Surveillance (MCS) in 
Coastal Fisheries Enhanced 

 

Private Sector Partnerships 
to Promote Sustainable 
Supply Chains 
Demonstrated 



Policies on managing coastal 
fisheries improved 

 

Capacities on ecosystem 
approach to fisheries 
management strengthened 

 

Constituencies demanding 
sustainable coastal fisheries 
and biodiversity conservation 
increased 

 

Coastal fisheries data systems 
improved 

 

Enforcement capacities 
improved 

 

Collaboration of enforcement 
authorities strengthened 

 

Partnerships with private 
sector accelerated 

 

Development and expansion 
of interventions to promote 
value addition and retention 
for Pacific nations and 
communities 



 

 

 

 

 


A.4 Links to USAID’S Global and Regional Strategies 

 

The overall, long-term goal of U.S. development assistance in the Pacific region is to support 
Pacific Islands partners on the Journey to Self-Reliance. The United States is a Pacific nation and 
has a deep and longstanding commitment to the future security, prosperity, and well-being of the 
people within the Pacific.68 The U.S. government has emphasized the importance of the Pacific 
Islands as a key part of the Indo-Pacific region,69 and the Asia Reassurance Initiative Act 
(ARIA) of 2018 further recognized the need for the United States to deepen cooperation with the 
Pacific Islands in areas of mutual interest.70 Under the Pacific Pledge of the Indo-Pacific Vision, 
the USG has committed over $100 million in new U.S. assistance to the region, including $63 
million for USAID programming. 

68 https://www.doi.gov/oia/interior-secretary-bernhardt-and-us-delegation-conclude-trip-pacific-islands-forum-partners 

69 https://www.state.gov/pacific-islands-forum-u-s-engagement-in-the-pacific-islands/ 

70 https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/2736/text 

 

This activity directly supports the goals of the Journey to Self-Reliance for USAID partner 
nations. The activity will promote interventions working towards increasing the resilience of 
PICs to become self-reliant in managing their natural resources and providing sustainable LMRs 
to the local communities that depend on those resources. This will mean building the capacity of 
PICs to plan, finance, and implement solutions to local development changes surrounding coastal 
fisheries sustainability and ensuring that there is a commitment to see these solutions through 
effectively, inclusively, and with accountability. 

 

The program supports the Indo-Pacific Vision’s objective of strengthening partnerships with 
longstanding allies to uphold rules-based order and advance shared governance goals in the 
region as applied to the environment context. The activity supports the security pillar of the Indo 
Pacific Vision by addressing IUU fishing in the PICs. The activity also supports the economic 
pillar by advancing sustainable coastal fisheries management as a foundation of economic 
growth. In particular, this supports Objective 3: Improve the Management of Natural Resources 
of USAID's Strategic Approach to implementing the Indo-Pacific Vision. 

 

The activity will support the Biodiversity Code. It will have an explicit biodiversity objective, 
identify interventions based on an analysis of threats to biodiversity and a corresponding theory 
of change, positively impact biodiversity in biologically significant areas, and monitor indicators 
along the theory of change. 

 

The activity should align and support USAID’s Private Sector Engagement Strategy, which 
promotes an enterprise development model as a more sustainable approach to empower people, 
communities and countries on their journey to self-reliance. While the private sector is nascent in 
many PICs, the activity should acknowledge and support opportunities where market-based 
solutions and the private sector are best placed solve development challenges. The private sector 
is also uniquely positioned to promote both scalability and sustainability given their networks, 
operations and capital. Where impediments exist that prevent private sector participation in 
interventions that support activity goals, the activity should partner with the private sector and 
government to identify potential solutions. 

 


The activity will support USAID’s Policy on Promoting the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (PRO-
IP), which guides development practitioners to strengthen the design and management of 
programs that affect Indigenous Peoples. By considering the ways that project design and 
activities may impact cultures, territories, resources, and/or livelihoods, the PRO-IP promotes 
thoughtful and direct engagement of Indigenous Peoples in the design, implementation and 
monitoring of projects to ensure the communities benefit, and that those benefits are in line with 
the communities’ self-determined development objectives. These efforts should contribute to 
deepening the impact of activities and creating more sustainable outcomes by effectively and 
appropriately partnering with Indigenous Peoples and addressing their challenges throughout the 
program cycle. 

 

Agencies making up the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific play an important role 
supporting PICs with scientific and technical needs to further their development objectives. The 
activity should seek collaboration and partnership with relevant CROP agencies in particular the 
Pacific Community (SPC) Fisheries, Aquaculture and Marine Ecosystems Division, which is the 
region’s leading organization supporting coastal fisheries. There may be other opportunities to 
collaborate with other CROP agencies such as the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency, the 
Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Program and the University of the South 
Pacific. 

 

The activity should leverage the resources of other donor organizations that have similar or 
related ongoing activities in the country. These include but are not limited to: the Asian 
Development Bank, World Bank, European Union, New Zealand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade, Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Japan International 
Cooperation Agency. 

 

The activity will also coordinate with other relevant USAID-supported projects in the Pacific. 
These include Climate Ready, Strengthening Democratic Governance in Pacific Islands, 
Lukautim Graun (PNG Biodiversity), the Pacific American Fund and RESILIENCE as well as 
other upcoming USAID programming to support improved natural resource management in the 
region. The activity may also need to adjust based on shocks and stressors within the region to 
align and coordinate with other programs and needs. 

 

A.5 U.S. Assistance and Partner Agencies in the Pacific 

 

The Recipient for the activity will have considerable interaction and coordination with other 
USG partners in the Pacific Islands, including implementers of the other USAID activities, and 
other USG agencies operating in the Pacific Islands, including U.S. Embassies, the U.S. 
Departments of State, Defense, and Commerce (i.e., National Oceanographic and Atmospheric 
Administration), and U.S. Peace Corps. Interaction with other USG agencies will be important 
for combatting IUU fishing and for ensuring good program agreement with ongoing IUU 
activities within the Pacific Islands region. 

 

 

END OF SECTION A 


SECTION B – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1 Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide not more than $15 million in total USAID funding over a five (5) year period. 

 

B.2 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date will be upon 
issuance of the final award. 

 

B.3 Substantial Involvement 

 

USAID anticipates award of a cooperative agreement. A cooperative agreement implies a level 
of “substantial involvement” by USAID in certain programmatic aspects of the award. This 
substantial involvement will be through the Agreement Officer (AO), except to the extent that 
he/she delegates authority to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) in writing. 

 

The anticipated substantial involvement elements for this award are as follows: 

 

a. Co-development after award of the cooperative agreement 


 

USAID is committed to designing activities that are both firmly grounded in rigorous 
analysis and evidence, and more able to adapt to new evidence and changing 
circumstances. This requires effective planning, project design, implementation, 
assessing, and learning to support adaptive project management. Following awarding of 
the Cooperative Agreement, USAID plans to collaborate closely with the Recipient on 
co-development of this activity. 

 

Co-development will include finalization of the Theory of Change (TOC) situation 
model, results chains, planning documents, and monitoring, evaluation, and learning 
plans. The process will include relevant members of USAID technical staff, other USG 
personnel, and specific technical experts, as appropriate. Finalizing the TOC will occur as 
soon as possible post award with input from USAID Mission and technical staff. Upon 
finalization of the TOC, appropriate efforts will be taken in concert with USAID 
technical staff to finalize the situation model, strategic approaches and update the results 
chains provided in the solicitation. Planning documents will be developed with and 
approved by USAID staff. The monitoring, evaluation, and learning plan will also be 
developed in connection with USAID technical experts and revised as necessary to 
achieve the activity goals. 

 

Understanding the threats from various potential shocks and stressors on the Pacific 
Islands region, USAID will work with the awardee to develop contingency plans to 


address shocks and stressors that would limit the success of program implementation and 
goals. Adaptive management in light of both shocks and stresses to the natural 
environment and coastal resources will ensure project goals are met and USAID is 
responsive to changing circumstances. 

 

b. Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plan 


 

Implementation plans include, but are not limited to, annual work plans, including 
planned activities for the following year and any subsequent revisions, international 
travel plans, planned expenditures, and event planning/management. 

 

USAID requires the approval of implementation plans annually to ensure alignment with 
stated goals, milestones, and outputs. The implementation plan communicates how and 
when the Recipient will complete project activities and is drafted annually to describe 
new activities. This plan will be developed in partnership between the Recipient and the 
AOR. The annual implementation plans, and subsequent revisions thereto, are subject to 
prior written approval by USAID’s AOR. 

 

c. Approval of Key Personnel 


 

USAID may designate as key personnel only those positions that are essential to the 
successful implementation of the recipient’s program. For this activity, USAID requires 
not more than three (3) key personnel. 

 

d. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 


 

USAID will participate in the following: 

 

1. Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the 
program will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the recipient. 
USAID may participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees 
must only deal with programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative 
matters; 


 

2. Approval is required for the subaward, transfer, or contracting out of any work under 
this cooperative agreement; 


 

3. Approval of the Recipient’s monitoring and evaluation plans; and 


 

4. Monitoring to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the 
program description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. 


 

e. No construction activities are authorized under this cooperative agreement. 


 


B.4 Title to Property 

 

Property title under the resultant agreement shall vest with the Recipient in accordance with the 
requirements of 2 CFR 200. 

 

B.5 Authorized Geographic Code 

 

Geographic Code 937 (the United States, the Recipient country, and developing countries other 
than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source) is the 
authorized USAID Principal Geographic Code for the procurement of commodities and services 
by Recipients under grants and cooperative agreements to non-governmental organizations when 
the award budget contains more than $250,000 worth of goods and services to be procured by the 
Recipient; and by subcontractors and subrecipients of awards. 

 

Geographic Code 935 (any area or country including the Recipient country, but excluding any 
country that is a prohibited source) is authorized USAID Principal Geographic Code for 
procurement of commodities and services under a grant and cooperative agreement when the 
total procurement element in the award budget is $250,000 or less. 

 

USAID’s rules for the source of goods other than “restricted goods,” are described in ADS 312 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1876/312.pdf). 

 

These rules do not apply to procurement by the Recipient with cost-sharing or program income 
funds. 

 

For an accurate identification of developing countries, advanced developing countries, and 
prohibited sources, please refer to the Automated Directive System (ADS) 310 entitled “Source 
and Nationality Requirements for Procurement of Commodities and Services Financed by 
USAID” (https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1876310.pdf). 

 

 

B.6 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Sustainable Coastal 
Fisheries Management activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will 
be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The 
Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with 
underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

END OF SECTION B 

 


 

SECTION C – ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 Eligible Applicants 

 

USAID encourages applications from potential new partners. USAID will not accept applications 
from individuals. 

 

To be eligible for award of a Cooperative Agreement, in addition to other conditions of this 
NOFO, organizations must have a commitment to non-discrimination with respect to 
beneficiaries and adherence to equal opportunity employment practices. Non-discrimination 
includes equal treatment without regard to race, religion, ethnicity, gender, and political 
affiliation. 

 

C.1.a Types of entities eligible to apply for funding under this NOFO: 

 

1. U.S. and Non-U.S. Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 


 

a) U.S. and Non-U.S. Non-Profit Organizations 


 

U.S. and non-U.S. private non-profit organizations may apply for funding under this 
NOFO. 

 

b) U.S. and Non-U.S. For-Profit Organizations 


 

U.S. and non-U.S. private for-profit organizations may apply for funding under this 
NOFO. Potential for-profit applicants should note that, in accordance with 2 CFR 
200.400(g), non-Federal entity may not earn or keep any profit resulting from Federal 
financial assistance. Furthermore, pursuant to 2 CFR 700.13(a)(1), Prohibition against 
profit: No funds will be paid as profit to any for-profit entity receiving or 
administering Federal financial assistance as a recipient or subrecipient. 

 

c) U.S. and Non-U.S. Colleges and Universities 


 

U.S. and non-U.S. colleges and universities may apply for funding under this NOFO. 
Please note, however, that this NOFO is focused on addressing the drivers of illegal, 
unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Pacific region. This NOFO is not 
intended to fund academic research. 

 

2. Public International Organizations (PIOs) 


 

PIOs may apply for funding under this NOFO. Please see ADS 308 for USAID policy on 
PIOs: http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/308. 

 

 


 

 

3. Private Voluntary Organizations (PVOs) 


 

NGOs that meet the definition of a Private Voluntary Organization (PVO) as defined in 
22 CFR 203 (https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2014-title22-vol1/xml/CFR-
2014-title22-vol1-part203.xml) are encouraged to register as a PVO with USAID. 
Applicants may find registration instructions here: https://www.usaid.gov/pvo 

 

4. New Partners 


 

USAID encourages applications from new partners that have not previously received 
USG funding. However, resultant awards to these organizations may be delayed because 
USAID generally must conduct pre-award surveys of these organizations in order to 
make a risk assessment decision, in accordance with ADS 303.3.9 (for NGOs; ADS 308 
for PIOs). Please refer below, for additional information on pre-award surveys. 

 

C.1.b Eligibility requirements 

 

Applicants must: 

 

• Have a valid DUNS number (https://www.grants.gov/applicants/organization-
registration/step-1-obtain-duns-number.html) and provide this information in their 
application; 
• Be registered in the System for Award Management 
(https://www.sam.gov/SAM/transcript/Quick_Guide_for_International_Entity_Registration.pdf); and 
• Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award, or an application, or plan under 
consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

USAID/Philippines will not make an award to an Applicant that has not fully complied with the 
DUNS and SAM requirements. Applicants must have established financial management, 
monitoring and evaluation processes, internal control systems, and policies and procedures that 
comply with established U.S. government standards, laws, and regulations. 

 

The successful Applicant will be subject to a responsibility determination assessment by the 
Agreement Officer (AO). The AO may require a pre-award survey that will determine whether 
the prospective recipient has the necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational 
controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the 
program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. 

 


C.2 Cost Share 

 

Cost share as defined in ADS 303.3.10 is “the resources a recipient contributes to the total cost 
of an agreement.” Cost sharing is an important element of the USAID-Recipient relationship. 
Cost sharing may consist of cash or in-kind contributions but, by definition, may not include 
USG funds or USG-funded in-kind contributions. Cost share becomes a condition of an award 
when it is part of the approved award budget and must be used for the accomplishment of 
program objectives. Information regarding the proposed cost share, if any, should be included in 
the budget. A cost share equivalent to at least 5% of the total federal share of the award is 
required for an Applicant to be eligible. Applications that do not meet the cost share 
requirement will not be considered. 

 

For guidance on cost share, please see ADS 303.3.10 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf). Specific for U.S. NGOs, 2 
CFR 200.306 (https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/CFR-2014-title2-vol1/CFR-2014-title2-vol1-
sec200-306). For non-U.S. NGOs, all cost sharing will be subject to the Required as Applicable 
Standard Provision “Cost Share” in ADS 303mab 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mab.pdf). 

 

C.3 Number of Applications 

 

The prime applicant may submit only one application. Sub-partners may be included in multiple 
applications. 

 

C.4 Other 

 

USAID/Philippines discourages applicants from requiring exclusive commitments by local 
organizations to participate as part of a subaward. Local organizations participating as a sub-
awardee may elect to participate in another subaward under a different application. 

 

 

END OF SECTION C 

 

 

(This space intentionally left blank) 

 

 

 

 


SECTION D – APPLICATION and SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1 Agency Point of Contact 

 

Name: Béatricé M. Condé 

Title: Supervisory Agreement Officer 

Address: Regional Office of Acquisition and Assistance (ROAA), 3/F Annex 2 

 Building, U.S. Embassy Compound, 1201 Roxas Boulevard, Ermita 

 Manila, Philippines 1000 

Email: manila-roaa-rfa@usaid.gov 

 

D.2 Questions and Answers 

 

All questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to Ms. Condé to the email 
address above with a copy to Haidee Juanillo, Acquisition and Assistance Specialist at 
hjuanillo@usaid.gov. 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted by e-mail no later than the date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants as an 
amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the 
lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

D.3 OVERALL SELECTION PROCESS 

 

USAID/Philippines will follow a two-phased process of application selection under this NOFO. 

The purpose of this process is to identify the Applicant with the greatest chance of success in 
achieving the activity objectives. 

 

 

Oral material, 
draft technical 
& draft 
cost/business 
application 
submission 


USAID 
Review 


Concept 
Paper 
submission 


Notification of 
an Apparently 
Successful 
Applicant 


USAID 
Review 


Applications 
with highest 
ratings are 
notified 


Phase 1 Concept Paper Review 


Phase 2 Oral Presentation/Draft RFA Interview 


Oral 
presentation 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Phase 1 Concept Paper Review 

 

Applicants must submit a Concept Paper not to exceed the page limit and submission instructions 
set forth in Section D.4. Concept Papers will be evaluated in accordance with the Merit Review 
Criteria set forth in Section E.2. 

 

The concept paper is intended to capture the Applicant’s understanding of the problem set, its 
proposed strategy and interventions to address the problems described in the NOFO, its 
organizational capability and expertise to design and implement the proposed interventions, its 
proposed results framework that will illustrate how activities lead to USAID’s desired results 
(See Section A.3 Objectives and Results). The concept paper is expected to be presented 
concisely. Applicants are to submit only the information required for concept papers. 

 

Concept papers must be written from a viewpoint that convincingly shows the innovations and 
approaches proposed by the applicant and its sub-awardees/partners (if there are any). The 
concept paper should lay out how the applicant and its sub-awardees/partners are uniquely 
capable of supporting the sustainable coastal fisheries interventions being proposed. USAID 
strongly encourages each applicant and its sub-awardees/partners to be thoroughly involved in 
the development of the concept paper and be fully in agreement with the proposed technical 
approach and management structure. 

 

The applicant is expected to propose the name or title of the activity. The concept paper must 
articulate the activity name/title that has been developed. The activity name/title should be 
representative of the innovations and approaches proposed by the applicant in the concept paper. 
It should also take into account the regional nature of the program and be mindful of the various 
local indigenous cultures and norms associated with the proposed geographies. 

 

The applicant must note that the Merit Review Criteria stated in Section E - Phase 1 Concept 
Paper Merit Review serve as the standard against which all concept papers submitted will be 
evaluated. The Merit Review Criteria will also serve to identify the significant matters, which the 
applicant must address in the concept paper. Applications with the highest ratings during the 
Phase 1 Concept Paper Review will be invited to Phase 2 – Oral Presentation/Draft RFA 
Interview. USAID contemplates on inviting up to three applicants to proceed to the next phase. 

 

In the event that only one applicant’s Concept Paper qualifies to be invited to Phase 2, USAID 
reserves the right to accelerate the process for convenience of the Government. USAID may 
choose to proceed to award. If USAID determines that none of the concept papers received are 
acceptable, USAID may issue an amendment to the NOFO to seek a second round of interested 
applicants. 

 

Phase 2 Oral Presentation/Draft Request for Application (RFA) Interview 

 

Based on USAID’s merit review of concept papers, the Applicants with the highest ratings (i.e., 
are determined to be technically acceptable and/or innovative) will be invited to present their 
draft technical application orally. USAID will notify the selected applicant(s) at least two (2) 
weeks prior to the scheduled oral presentation date. At the time of the notification, USAID will 


provide the applicants with the discussion items based on the review of concept papers, and 
additional guidance for the oral presentation, if necessary, including the content, order, and 
format of the presentation and the duration of the presentation and discussions. Submission of 
the oral presentation is required three days in advance of the scheduled presentation. 

 

The applicant’s presenting team must include the proposed Key Personnel, Senior Program 
Management representatives, and major sub-awardees/partners, as appropriate. USAID will only 
accommodate up to 7 attendees. 

 

All oral presentations will be in-person subject to the lifting of travel restrictions. USAID may 
choose to hold an online conference instead of an in-person oral presentation if the latter is not 
feasible. USAID anticipates the need for remote access and presentation ability and will provide 
the platform for presentation for the Applicants invited for oral presentations. Online conference 
information will be included in the notification letter. 

 

Submission of a draft technical application and draft cost/business application based on the 
concept paper is required prior to the scheduling of the oral presentation. The application should 
provide more details but should not deviate from the elements and information of the concept 
paper. The draft technical application should also address any concerns and clarifications that 
USAID will raise during Phase 1 Concept Paper Review. At this stage, both the draft technical 
and draft cost/business applications are considered as the “draft RFA” and subject to revision 
after the oral presentation. The draft technical and draft cost/business application should be 
submitted along with the oral presentation three days in advance of the scheduled presentation. 

 

All oral presentations will be evaluated and scored by the selection committee in accordance 
with the Merit Review Criteria set forth in Section E Phase 2 Oral Presentation/Draft RFA 
Interview Merit Review. 

 

D.4 APPLICATION MATERIALS AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

Applicants are expected to review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO and its 
amendments (if any), before submitting the documents required at each Phase of the selection 
process. Applicants must ensure the completeness of the application package before submission. 
Failure to include all information or to organize the application in the manner prescribed may 
result in the rejection of the application as being unacceptable. USAID will only review 
applications that are complete and submitted on time. 

 

Electronic Submission Procedure: Applications must be submitted electronically via e-mail to 
the agency point of contact at manila-roaa-rfa@usaid.gov, with a copy to Haidee Juanillo at 
hjuanillo@usaid.gov. The applications must be received by the USAID/Philippines internet 
server no later than the date and time specified in the cover letter of this NOFO. Electronic 
transmission and attachments must not exceed 25mb per email. E-mail attachments in *.zip 
files will not be accepted. The document must be in Adobe Acrobat portable document format 
(PDF), Microsoft Word and Excel format as applicable. If multiple emails are needed to submit a 
complete document, the e-mail subject line must contain the following information: 

 


• Phase 1: NOFO number, Organization name, Concept Paper, Part 1 of 2 
• Phase 2: NOFO number, Organization name, Oral Presentation, Part 1 of 2 
• Phase 2: NOFO number, Organization name, Draft Technical Application, Part 1 of 2 
• Phase 2: NOFO number, Organization name, Draft Cost Application, Part 1 of 2 


 

Hard copy or faxed applications are not acceptable. 

 

USAID will notify applicants of the receipt of their application via email. Likewise, applicants 
must check to confirm that all emails and attachments were indeed sent and request for 
confirmation of receipt. 

 

D.5 Content and Format of Application 

 

1. General Application Format 


 

Applicants must format all submissions as follows: 

 

• Phase 1 Concept Paper: PDF format 
• Phase 2 Oral Presentation (Upon USAID Request): Microsoft PowerPoint or PDF 
• Phase 2 Draft Technical Application (Upon USAID Request): PDF format 
• Phase 2 Draft Cost/Business Application (Upon USAID Request): Budget – in 
U.S. dollars; unlocked Microsoft Excel Format; Budget notes/narrative in PDF 
format 
• Spacing: Single-spaced 
• Language: English 
• Font: Legible without the need for magnification 
• Headers and/or footers on each page; pages must be numbered consecutively 


 

2. Phase 1: Concept Paper Content and Format 


 

The written concept paper should be limited to 10 pages and should be organized as follows: 

 

• Cover Page – See below (not included in the page limitations) 
• Table of Contents must include major sections, page numbers, and hyperlinks to 
easily cross-reference and identify merit review criteria (not included in the page 
limitations) 
• Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the 
application (one page, not included in the page limitations) 
• Technical Approach - See below (7 pages, included in the page limitation) 
• Organizational Management and Staffing Plan - See below (2 pages, included in the 
page limitation) 
• Organizational Capability and Past Experience - See below (1 page, included in the 
page limitation) 
• Annexes: (See sub-section on Annexes, below) 



• References – a formatted list of all references that were used in the drafting of the 
Application (not included in the page limitations) 


 

Cover Page 

 

The cover page should have a cover page which includes the following: 

 

a) Name of Organization 

b) Business Address 

c) Names of Authorized Representative and Alternate with their Titles 

d) Phone and fax numbers 

e) E-mail addresses 

f) Notice of Funding Opportunity number 

g) Program Title 

h) Amount of Funding Requested from USAID and Cost Share Amount 

i) Date of Submission 

j) Names of proposed subrecipients or partnerships (identify if local organization, 
per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 303 

 

Factor 1: Technical Approach (not to exceed seven [7] pages, included in the page 
limitation) 

 

The Applicant should present its overall vision for the stated goal and objectives of 
the NOFO and explain how the Applicant and its sub-awardees/partners can support 
this vision. Since the Applicant will collaboratively develop the final program 
description with USAID, it is not necessary to present a full or detailed technical 
application addressing every aspect of the priority areas listed under the activity 
objective. The Applicant will use the technical general approach to demonstrate an 
understanding of the Pacific context, the main actors, and the key questions and 
guiding principles outlined in the NOFO. 

 

Applicants must focus on describing how they propose to achieve the program 
objectives and elaborate on how the proposed technical approach is the most effective 
way to address the challenges as described in the NOFO. At a minimum, this section 
must contain: 

 

• Summary Statement: A brief statement of the problem(s)/issue(s) being 
addressed, and proposed strategies/activities. 
• Timeline: Proposed timeline, i.e. project duration or time needed to complete 
the proposed activities. All projects should be 60 months in duration. 
• Project description: includes vision statement, brief narratives describing the 
situational context and background (limited to what is necessary to understand 
the project), the problem to be addressed, a description of proposed project 
objectives, expected results and activities. 


 

The program description must include a brief discussion on: 


 

• Sustainability (how the project will be supported and can continue without 
donor funding) and self-reliance; 
• Gender considerations; 
• Environmental compliance and climate risk mitigation; and 
• Partnering with local organizations. 


 

Factor 2: Organizational Management and Staffing Plan – (not to exceed two [2] 
pages, included in the page limitation) 

 

This activity will require specialized skills hence the Applicant should clearly 
describe its organizational skills and capacity and define the value it brings. If 
subawards/partnerships are proposed, the Applicant should describe how they 
complement one another, succinctly outline a leadership approach that will create a 
shared common vision and purpose that builds trust and recognizes the value and 
contribution of all sub-awardees/partners. 

 

In addition, the Applicant should aim to describe how their plan involves a range of 
local partners, private, non-profit, and public entities. Actors should be described 
based on their own experience within the development space. These groups could 
include, from a non-exhaustive list, social enterprises, foundations, business, diaspora 
and communities. All proposed partners should have descriptions detailing previous 
work addressing development challenges, experience partnering with others, and 
where applicable, a proven track record in their respective areas of expertise. 
Applicants are expected to describe how they will successfully engage other partners 
in their proposed activities, such as through building sustained private sector or civil 
society organizations collaborations. 

 

The Applicant should describe how it intends to coordinate the strategic approach on 
two levels. The first level of coordination will be at the Mission level where the 
program coordinates with relevant current and upcoming Activities managed by 
USAID/Pacific Islands to avoid overlap and increase synergies. The second level of 
coordination will focus on broader coordination across the Applicant and sub-
awardees/partners (if any) with the Pacific government agencies and civil society 
organizations (CSOs), and other development partners. Through appropriate 
coordination mechanisms, the Applicant should also demonstrate how they will 
ensure the sharing of information that results from coordination efforts with 
stakeholders. 

 

The Applicant should propose a staffing plan to meet the objectives outlined in 
Section A of the NOFO and propose a mix of positions and management structure. 

 

The Staffing Plan should include a description of team composition, and proposed 
personnel that will provide the technical, analytical, management, and interpersonal 
skills and experience to convincingly demonstrate the Applicants’ ability to 


effectively and efficiently achieve the objectives specified in the Program 
Description. 

 

The roles and responsibilities for key personnel and other critical staff proposed under 
the staffing pattern and levels of effort – including any technical or operational staff 
at the home office that will support/backstop the activity – should be clearly 
addressed. Brief descriptions for each technical and managerial staff position should 
be included in this Section. An Organizational Chart demonstrating lines of authority 
and staff responsibility should be included as an annex. 

 

The professional staff proposed in addition to key personnel shall possess the 
complementary experience that reflects a combination of strong management as well 
as specific technical-managerial expertise and competencies with the appropriate mix 
of managers, technical experts and administrative staff. An annex providing reference 
information for each key personnel candidate proposed should also be included. 

 

Factor 3: Organizational Capability and Past Experience – (not to exceed one (1) 
page, included in the page limitation) 

 

Applicants should discuss their capability and experience, and that of its major sub-
awardees, and how that experience is relevant to successfully implementing the 
program. A major sub-awardee is a partner whose proposed cost exceeds 15% of the 
Applicant’s total proposed cost. Applicants should also discuss their experience 
managing activities of similar size and complexity and in working in the Pacific 
region. Applicants should describe their ability to gather the resources and expertise 
necessary to implement their application, and to be able to sustain their efforts for the 
duration of the resulting cooperative agreement. USAID will evaluate the Applicant 
and all proposed major sub-awardees. 

 

Recent past experience information must be provided and should relate to the specific 
technical nature of the Activity. The Applicant must also provide past experience and 
performance information for major sub-awardee/partner (as an Annex; not to exceed 
one page per organization). The Applicant is strongly encouraged to provide specific 
examples of significant impact of their past projects and how cooperation in prior 
partnerships/ consortia contributed to that impact. USAID will determine the 
relevance (complexity, scope, size and magnitude) of similar performance 
information as a predictor of probable performance under the subject requirement. 
USAID may consider relevant projects successfully performed during the past three 
to five years to be “recent past experience.” 

 

For each project referenced, provide the following information: 

 

• Instrument type: Agreement, grant, contract, order or other Award Number or 
other identifying number; 
• Agency or entity providing the funding; 



• Description of the program or scope of work, including, but not limited to a 
brief discussion of the complexity/diversity of tasks; 
• Primary location(s) of program or work; 
• Period of performance; 
• Skills/expertise required; 
• Dollar/value; and 
• Contact information for two persons, including name, job title, mailing 
address, phone numbers and e-mail address. 


 

USAID/Philippines reserves the right to verify the experience and past performance 
record of cited projects or other recent projects by reviewing Contractor Performance 
Reports (CPARs), other performance reports, or to interview cited references or other 
persons knowledgeable of the Applicant’s performance on a particular project. 
USAID/ Philippines may check any or all cited references to verify supplied 
information and/or to assess reference satisfaction with performance. The Agreement 
Officer may also consult other resources and references not provided by the applicant 
related to the applicant’s past performance. 

 

Annexes – (not included in the page limitations) 

 

• Acronym List/Definition (not to exceed one page) 
• Timeline (not to exceed three pages) 
• Situation Model and Results Chains (not to exceed two pages) 
• Organizational Chart/Staffing Plan (not to exceed one page) 
• Resume of Key Personnel (not to exceed one page/personnel) 
• Past Experience and letter of commitment of major sub-awardees (not to 
exceed two pages per major sub-awardee) 
• Other charts, graphs, tables, data or information considered essential to the 
application (not to exceed two pages) 


 

A. Timeline 


 

The timeline should include a gantt chart of indicative activities for a duration of 60 
months. 

 

B. Situation Model71 and Results Chains72 


71 https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/htg2_summary_508.pdf 

72 https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/htg1_summary_508.pdf 

 

 

The Applicant must demonstrate its understanding of the requirements of this NOFO 
by presenting a general situational model along with an overall Results Chain that 
graphically illustrate the proposed theory of change that align with the results 
framework described in Section A of the NOFO. Note that the situational model and 


theory of change will be finalized in the co-development phase of the application 
process. 

 

C. Organizational Chart/Staffing Plan 


 

The organizational chart must show the proposed staffing configuration including, but 
not limited to, a representation of the staff responsibility and reporting lines, lines of 
authority, and relationships between the different positions and units. The chart 
should also show how the sub-awardees will relate with the applicant. 

 

3. Phase 2: Oral Presentation and Draft RFA (Draft Technical Application and Draft 
Cost Proposal) Content and Format (Upon USAID Request) 


 

Oral Presentation 

 

All oral presentations will follow the same general format in terms of sections and timing 
for the concept papers selected to move forward in the process described in this NOFO. 
The oral presentation agenda is as follows: 

 

• Introductions (10 minutes) [Lead: Agreement Officer] 
• Oral Presentation to include details of the concept proposal based on the factors in 
Section E (1.5 hours) [Lead: Applicant] 
• Questions and Answers/Discussions – Round 1 (2 hours) [Lead: Selection 
Committee and Applicant] 
• Break for Applicant/USAID Deliberations – (1 hour) 
• Questions and Answers/Discussions – Round 2 (1 hour) (Lead: Selection 
Committee and Applicant] 
• Adjournment/Next Steps (10 minutes) [Lead: Agreement Officer] 


 

The Applicant’s presenting team should be made up of the Key Personnel, Senior 
Program Management representatives, and major sub-awardees/partners, as appropriate. 
The Applicant is limited to seven (7) attendees. All attendees must be present on the date 
and time specified for the presentation. 

 

The audience for the Oral Presentations will consist of the Selection Committee (SC), the 
Agreement Officer and the Acquisition & Assistance Specialist/s and potentially external 
observers. The Agreement Officer will chair the Oral Presentations; however, USAID 
may use an in-house or contracted moderator to facilitate the presentations. 

 

While the Concept Paper will be presented in PowerPoint format, the remaining 
discussions will be in Questions and Answers format with little time for consultation 
among members of the presenting team. Each team member should be an expert and 
should use PowerPoint to present the salient/important points of the Concept Paper 
without reading the slide contents verbatim to the audience. Team members must be able 


to “think on their feet” and to actively participate in the discussion of subsequent 
Questions and Answers. 

 

Each oral presentation will be evaluated and rated by the SC in accordance with the merit 
factors set forth under Section E Phase 2 Oral Presentation/Draft RFA Interview Merit 
Review. The Applicant’s presentation must not last more than one and a half hours. 
Based on the review, the AO will determine the Apparently Successful Applicant 
(ASA) who will be invited to submit a full application based on the comments and 
questions noted during the review. Unsuccessful applicants after the oral presentation 
review will be notified accordingly. 

 

Draft RFA (Draft Technical Application and Draft Cost/Business Application) 

 

Draft Technical Application 

 

The written draft technical application will be limited to 25 pages, excluding annexes. The 
Applicant will organize the draft technical application in the same manner as the concept 
note. Further instructions about organization, annexes and format will be provided through 
USAID’s request for an oral presentation and draft RFA. 

 

Draft Cost/Business Application Format and Content 

 

The draft cost/business application must be submitted separately from the draft technical 
application. The applicant must follow the prescribed content and format in Section D. 
Budget spreadsheets must be in U.S. Dollars, in unlocked Microsoft Excel format, pages with 
signatures in PDF format. 

 

The draft cost/business Application must cover the full period of performance. The budget 
should be expressed in U.S. Dollars and must reflect the exchange rate(s) used. 

 

A summary of the budget must be submitted using the Standard Form 424, 424A and 424B. 
Instructions on how to complete the forms are found here: https://www.grants.gov/forms/sf-
424-family.html. The summary budget should have the budget categories as shown in 
SF424A, with costs broken down by year; detailed/itemized budget; budget narrative 
explaining costs to be incurred; and other administrative documentation, as necessary. The 
forms when submitted, must be signed by an authorized representative of the 
Applicant’s organization. 

 

The following sections describe the documentation that applicants for an Assistance award 
must submit to USAID prior to award. While there is no page limit for the cost application, 
applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible, but still provide the necessary detail to 
address the following: 

 

• Detailed Budget (no page limit), which provides a breakdown by elements of cost 
(e.g. personnel, fringe benefits, travel, equipment, supplies, contractual, construction, 
other direct costs, indirect costs, cost sharing (if any) for the total estimated amount of 



implementation of the project according to your organization’s approach. The budget 
shall include costs associated with all programmatic activities during the project 
implementation. 


 

• Budget Narrative, which provides detailed budget explanations and supporting 
justification of each proposed budget line item. It must briefly describe programmatic 
relevance and clearly identify the basis of estimate (i.e. how the budget number was 
determined fair and reasonable) for each cost element, such as market surveys, price 
quotations, current salaries, historical experience, etc. The budget narrative should 
demonstrate how the budget supports and allocates sufficient and appropriate funding 
for all elements of the program activities described in Section A, Program Description 
of this NOFO. 


 

The cost application should contain the budget categories as shown on the SF-424A: 

 

− Personnel/Labor: Direct salaries and wages should be proposed in accordance with 
the organization’s personnel policies. Details on the basis of estimate for each 
proposed salary should be sufficiently addressed in the budget narratives for all 
positions [key personnel, consultants, short-term technical assistance and non-key 
personnel]. Any proposed salary increase must be sufficiently justified and supported 
with the organization’s personnel policies (to be provided as annex to the cost 
application). 




 

Note: Annual salary increase and/or promotional increase may be granted in 
accordance with the applicant’s established policies. 

 

− Fringe Benefits: If accounted for as a separate item of cost, fringe benefits should be 
accounted in accordance with local labor law. 




 

− Travel and Per Diem: The application budget and narrative should indicate the 
purpose of trip(s), number of trips, domestic and international, and the estimated unit 
of cost of each. Specify the origin and destination for each proposed trip, duration of 
travel and number of individuals traveling. Proposed per diem rates must be in 
accordance with the applicant’s established policies and practices that are uniformly 
applied to federally financed and other activities of the applicant. 




 

− Equipment: The application should specify the procurement of any tangible personal 
property (including information technology systems) having a useful life of more than 
one year and a per-unit acquisition cost which equals or exceeds the lesser of the 
capitalization level established by the non-Federal entity for financial statement 
purposes, or $5,000. The application should indicate the quantity of the equipment to 
be purchased, the unit cost and the total price. 


 

− Supplies: The application should specify the procurement of all tangible personal 
property other than those described in Equipment. A computing device is a supply if 



the acquisition cost is less than the lesser of the capitalization level established by the 
non-Federal entity for financial statement purposes or $5,000, regardless of the length 
of its useful life. The application should indicate the quantity of the equipment to be 
purchased, the unit cost and the total price. 


 

− Contractual: The application should include, if any, subaward(s). Applicants who 
intend to utilize other partnering organization(s) should indicate the extent intended 
and a complete cost breakdown, as well as all the information required herein for the 
applicant. Major partnering organization(s) the same cost format as submitted 
by the applicant. 


 

− Construction: Construction will not be funded by USAID under this program. 


 

− Other Direct Costs (ODC): could include costs related to program activities 
described in the PD; communications, office rental, utilities, report preparation costs, 
other office operation costs, branding/marking costs, supplies, etc. The narrative 
should provide a complete breakdown and support for each item of other direct costs. 


 

− Cost share: ADS 303.3.10 Cost Share defines cost share as “the resources a recipient 
contributes to the total cost of an agreement. It is the portion of project or program 
costs not borne by the Federal Government.” Cost share is required under this NOFO. 


 

The following information should be taken into consideration when developing the budget: 

 

(1) Salaries and wages must be reflective of the “market value” for each position. 
Salaries and wages may not exceed the applicant’s established written personnel 
policy and practice, including the applicant’s established pay scale for equivalent 
classifications of employees, which shall be certified by the Applicant. 


 

Salaries for locally employed staff should correspond to the local market averages for 
similar positions. Applicants are expected to conduct their own market research for 
determining the salary scale for locally hired positions in Belarus or rely on their 
previous work experience and other implementing partners’ experience in the region. 

 

(2) This USAID-funded activity implemented under the anticipated cooperative 
agreement will be for an estimated period of performance of five (5) years; also 
referred to as the award period. Unless the applicant/Recipient demonstrates 
otherwise to the USAID Agreement Officer’s satisfaction, Cooperating Country 
Nationals (CCNs) employed by the applicant/Recipient solely to work under the 
USAID-funded project under this agreement are considered by USAID as employed 
by the applicant/Recipient for a specified period not to exceed the agreement period. 


 

(3) If the Applicant or its proposed sub-awardee does not have a negotiated indirect cost 
rate agreement (NICRA) from any U.S. government audit agency, the applicant must 
provide information regarding how the fringe benefit rates are applied for each 
category of employees and an explanation of the benefits included in the rate. 



 

(4) Applicants should include any estimated USAID branding and marking costs in their 
budget. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all costs related to the 
implementation of the MEL Plan are included in the cost application. Applicants need 
to account for resources required for implementing and monitoring the environmental 
compliance activities in the technical application and in the budget and describe 
associated costs in detail to the degree possible in the budget narrative. 


 

(5) Details regarding the level of cost share the applicant is proposing for this activity. 


 

D. Risk Assessment 


 

In order for an award to be made, the USAID Agreement Officer must evaluate the risks 
posed by Applicants as outlined in 2 CFR 200.205 (https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?node=se2.1.200_1205&rgn=div8) and ADS 303.3.9 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf). This means that the 
Applicant must possess, or must have the ability to obtain the necessary management and 
technical competence to conduct the proposed program, and must agree to practice mutually 
agreed-upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided or funded by 
USAID. 

 

i. Financial stability; 
ii. Quality of management systems and ability to meet the management standards 
prescribed in this part; 
iii. History of performance. The Applicant’s record in managing Federal awards, if it is a 
prior Recipient of Federal awards, including timelines of compliance with applicable 
reporting requirements, conformance to the terms and conditions of previous Federal 
awards, and if applicable, the extent to which any previously awarded amounts will 
be expended prior to future awards. Please refer to Section D for the submission of 
relevant past performance information; 
iv. Reports and findings of any other available audits; 
v. The Applicant’s ability to effectively implement statutory, regulatory, or other 
requirements imposed on non-Federal entities; and 
vi. Whether the Applicant is otherwise qualified to receive an award under applicable 
laws and regulations (e.g., Nondiscrimination, Lobbying, Debarment/Suspension, 
Terrorist Financing, etc.). 


 

In the absence of a positive risk assessment, an award can ordinarily not be made. Awards to 
potential new Recipients may be significantly delayed if USAID must undertake necessary 
pre-award surveys of these organizations to make an adequate risk assessment. These 
organizations should take this into account and plan their implementation dates and activities 
accordingly. 

 

a. Indirect Cost Rate Agreement 




 


The applicant must submit a Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement NICRA if the 
organization has such an agreement with an agency or department of the U.S. 
Government. If no NICRA the applicant should submit the following: 

 

Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public Account 
(CPA) documenting the review of the financial statements was performed in accordance 
with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; that management is 
responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in 
accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework and for designing, 
implementing and maintaining internal control relevant to the preparation. The account 
must also state the he or she is not aware of any material modifications that should be 
made to the financial statements; or 

 

Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issues a report documenting the audit 
was conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the 
financial statements are the responsibility of management, provides an opinion that the 
financial statements present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the 
company and the results of operations are in conformity with the applicable financial 
reporting framework (or issues a qualified opinion if the financial statements are not in 
conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework. 

 

b. Certifications, Assurances, and other Statements of the Applicant 




 

Required assurance, certifications and representations: Applicants are required to 
complete Certifications, Assurances and other Statements of the Recipient. Please note 
that these certifications are required for both the applicant and all sub-grantees. 
Applicants may view the current Certifications, Assurances and Other Statements of the 
Recipient in ADS 303: http://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mav. 

 

c. Additional Information 




 

A. Applicants must submit any additional evidence of financial responsibility deemed 
necessary for the Agreement Officer to make a positive risk assessment to manage 
USG funds. The information submitted should substantiate that the applicant: 


 

• Has adequate financial, management and personnel resources and systems, or 
the ability to obtain such resources as required during the performance of the 
award; 


 

• Has the ability to comply with the award terms and conditions, taking into 
account all existing and currently prospective commitments of the applicant, 
both nongovernmental and governmental; 


 

• Has a satisfactory record of performance. Generally, relevant unsatisfactory 
performance in the past is enough to justify a finding of non-responsibility, 



unless there is clear evidence of subsequent satisfactory performance or the 
applicant has taken adequate corrective measures to assure that it will be able 
to perform its functions satisfactory; 


 

• Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; and 


 

• Is otherwise qualified to receive an award under applicable laws and 
regulations. 


 

B. Proof of Dunn and Bradstreet and SAM registration. 


 

USAID may not award to an Applicant until the Applicant has complied with all 
applicable unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. The Applicant is required to: 

 

• Be registered in SAM before submitting its full application 
• Provide valid unique identifier (DUNS number) in its application; and, 
• Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at 
all times during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan 
under consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take several weeks to complete. Therefore, the 
Applicant is encouraged to obtain them early to be eligible for an award under this 
NOFO. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov/ 

 

Completion of an early registration does not constitute any commitment on the part 
of the U.S. Government to make an award. 

 

d. Funding Restrictions 




 

Any award will not allow for the reimbursement of pre-award costs. 

 

USAID policy is not to award “profit” under assistance instruments to the Prime recipient. 
However, all reasonable, allocable, and allowable expenses, both direct and indirect, which 
are related to the agreement program and are in accordance with applicable cost principles 
under 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. of the Uniform Administrative Requirements may be paid 
under the anticipated award. 

 

e. Potential Request for Additional Documentation 




 

Upon consideration of award or during the negotiations leading to an award, applicants may 
be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the Agreement Officer 


to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. Applicants should not submit the 
information below with their applications. The information in this section is provided so 
that applicants may become familiar with additional documentation that may be requested by 
the Agreement Officer. 

 

The information submitted should substantiate: 

 

- Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable. 
- Whether the organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting 
manual and personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, 
leave, differentials, etc., submitted under this section have been reviewed and approved 
by any agency of the Federal Government, and if so, provide the name, address, and 
phone number of the cognizant reviewing official. The applicant should provide copies 
of the same. 


 

 

END OF SECTION D 

 

 


SECTION E – APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. The Phase 1 Concept Papers and Phase 2 Oral Presentation/Draft 
RFA Interview will be evaluated by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in 
this section. 

 

E.2 REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 

 

E.2.a Technical Review 

 

There are two (2) distinct merit review phases as described in Section D. The specific merit 

review criteria are as follows for each phase: 

Merit Review 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following 
criteria shown in descending order of importance: 

 

• Technical Approach; 
• Organization Management and Staffing Plan; and 
• Organizational Capability and Past Experience. 


 

Phase 1 - Concept Paper Merit Review 

 

Factor 1: Technical Approach 

 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the Applicant clearly articulates its 
evidence-based, innovative and feasible technical approach for the key results set forth in the 
Program Description and convincingly demonstrates the rationale of how it will achieve the 
desired outcomes of the NOFO. 

 

The proposed methodology incorporates innovative and new techniques that are evidence-
based with a high likelihood to increase the effectiveness of the project. The methodology 
must also build upon best practices and lessons learned/developed by the Applicant, other 
organizations, or USAID under similar programs. Additionally, the Applicant proposes 
specific and effective approaches to advance sustainable coastal fisheries management in the 
Pacific region. 

 

 

 


Factor 2: Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 

 

Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the Applicant’s organizational 
management and staffing plan demonstrates if the Applicant will effectively and efficiently 
achieve the objectives set forth in the NOFO. If sub-awardees/partners are proposed, the 
applicants will also be evaluated whether its proposed partners represent the best 
combination of organizations to develop and implement this project based on the capability 
of each member on its specialized area. The organizational management and staffing plan 
will be evaluated on the extent to which the Applicant describes the division of labor among 
Applicant and sub-awardees/partners and their coordination and collaboration with the 
relevant government authorities in the Pacific region, USAID and other stakeholders. 

 

The elements of this review factor include: 

 

• The overall quality of the management and staffing plan to implement the project, 
including the roles of other partners, as applicable; 
• The coherence of the supporting organizational structure, as reflected in the 
organigram, that matches the required skills to accomplish the full range of program 
activities; 
• Detailed explanation of any proposed partnerships and/or consortium that the 
Applicant will participate in to carry out project interventions; 
• Identified positions for at least three (3) key personnel and the type of skills each key 
personnel will need as well as their appropriateness to the technical approach outlined 
in the application. 


 

Factor 3: Organizational Capability and Past Experience 

 

Applicants will be evaluated on the degree to which the Applicant convincingly demonstrates 
that it possesses the institutional capacity to successfully implement the proposed 
interventions to achieve the desired outcomes. The elements under this review factor are: 

 

• Demonstrated experience of the Applicant in managing projects of similar size and 
complexity; 
• Demonstrated experience of the Applicant and its major sub-awardees/partners on 
relevant activities of comparable scope; and 
• Demonstrated experience of the Applicant and its major sub-awardees/partners in 
working in the Pacific region or similar regional context. 


 

In cases where an Applicant lacks relevant past performance history or in which information 
on past performance is not available, the Applicant will not be evaluated favorably or 
unfavorably on past performance. In such cases the Applicant will be rated “neutral”. The 
“neutral” rating provided to these applicants is at the Agreement Officer's discretion based on 
the past performance ratings for all other applicants. Prior to assigning a "neutral" past 
performance rating, the Agreement Officer may take into account a broad range of 
information related to an applicant’s past performance. 


 

Phase 2 – Oral Presentation/Draft RFA Interview Merit Review 

 

Phase 2 - Oral Presentation/Draft RFA will be reviewed based on the following merit criteria and 
sub-criteria in descending order of importance: 

 

a) Overview of the Technical Approach 
b) Personnel and Management Structure 
c) Monitoring and Evaluation 
d) Proposed Co-Development/Collaborative Approach 


 

Each oral presentation will be evaluated and rated by the Selection Committee (SC) in 
accordance with the Merit Review Criteria set forth in this section. The Merit Review Criteria 
are presented in descending order of importance. 

 

Factor 1: Overview of the Technical Approach 

 

The Applicant will be evaluated on: 

 

• The extent to which the Applicant clearly demonstrates the causal logic of its Theory 
of Change in achieving the objectives of the NOFO; 
• The extent to which the Applicant demonstrates that its proposed interventions are 
realistic, innovative and operationally feasible to achieve the objectives of the NOFO; 
• A comprehensive approach including technical assistance to introduce scaling up 
interventions; 
• The extent to which the Applicant integrate the gender perspective discussed in the 
NOFO; and 
• Institutionalization and sustainability to improve the likelihood that the programs 
being supported will continue beyond and without USAID funding. 


 

Factor 2: Organizational Management and Staffing Plan 

 

The Applicant will be evaluated on the following: 

• The Applicant demonstrates a feasible approach to ensure effective coordination and 
collaboration with various partners, including relevant government authorities, other 
non-state organizations and other USAID projects/activities; 
• The extent to which the Applicant demonstrates that its proposed use of partners/sub-
partners/ consortium members/local networks will achieve the various results sought; 
• The extent to which Applicant clearly articulate the roles and responsibilities of the 
Home Office and field-based staff, including their assigned management and 
decision-making authorities, and how this organizational structure will effectively and 
efficiently achieve the objectives of the NOFO; and 


 


• The extent to which Applicant demonstrates that its proposed staffing plan and 
staffing mix of skills and knowledge will enable the Applicant to implement the 
proposed technical approach effectively. 


 

Factor 3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Methodology 

 

The Applicant will be evaluated on the extent to which it clearly describes its MEL, 
methodology and how the structure of the proposed MEL system will apply adaptive 
management techniques to inform activity management and key decisions. 

 

Factor 4: Proposed Co-Development/Collaborative Approach 

 

The Applicant will be evaluated on workability of their plan and how they envision the 
collaborative program description development process. Specifically, the applicant will be 
evaluated on its planned coordination and communication with USAID, and the role of the 
Applicant’s organization and major sub-awardees/partners if applicable. Using USAID’s 
principles for Collaborating, Learning and Adapting, applicants will also be evaluated on 
their proposed logical process for collaborative development with a notional timeline for 
completion of the Program Description with USAID. 

 

E.2.b Cost Review 

 

Review of Proposed Budget 

 

The Draft Cost Application will be reviewed separately from and in conjunction with the Oral 
Presentation/Draft RFA Interview. While the cost application will not be rated, the Applicant 
should have a structure that will allow it to provide the greatest value (highest result) at a 
reasonable cost. The draft cost application will be reviewed to ensure it aligns with the draft 
technical application. 

 

The Final Cost Application will be reviewed for general completeness, reasonableness, 
allowability and allocability. Cost realism is an assessment of the accuracy with the proposed 
costs and represents the most probable cost of performance within the Applicant’s technical and 
management approach. Cost realism review will be performed as part of the review process to: 
(i) verify the Applicant’s understanding of the activity objective; (ii) assess the degree to which 
the cost application reflects the approaches and/or risk assessments made in the technical 
application as well as the risk that the Applicant will provide the supplies or services for the 
offered cost; and (iii) assess the degree to which the cost included in the cost application 
accurately represent the work effort included in the technical application. 

 

The Final Cost Application will also be reviewed to ensure that all compliance requirements 
have been satisfied and the Agreement Officer can make an affirmative determination of 
responsibility. 

 

 

 


E.3 PRE-AWARD SURVEYS 

 

Prior to making an award under this competition, the USAID Agreement Officer may perform a 
pre-award survey of a prospective NGO recipient if he/she determines that any of the following 
criteria apply, in accordance with USAID ADS Chapter 303.3.9.1: 

 

• USAID is uncertain about the prospective recipient's capacity to perform financially 
or programmatically. 




 

• The prospective recipient has never had a USAID grant, cooperative agreement, or 
contract. This requirement does not apply to Fixed Amount Awards. 




 

• The prospective recipient has not received an award from any Federal agency within 
the last five years. This requirement does not apply to Fixed Amount Awards. 




 

• USAID has knowledge of deficiencies in the applicant's annual audit (Single Audit or 
equivalent). 




 

• The USAID Agreement Officer determines it to be in the best interest of the U.S. 
Government. 




 

Accounting systems, audit issues, and management capability questions may be reviewed as 
part of this process in order to determine whether the prospective recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills in order to 
achieve the objectives of the program, or whether specific conditions will be needed. If notified 
by USAID that a pre-award survey is necessary, applicants must prepare in advance the 
required information and documents. A pre-award survey does not commit USAID to make an 
award to any organization. 

 

END OF SECTION E 

 

 


 

SECTION F – FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1 Federal Award Notices 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

- A written award mailed or otherwise furnished to the successful applicant within 
the application’s validity time as specified either in the application or in this NOFO 
(whichever is later) shall result in a binding Cooperative Agreement without further 
action by either party. Before the application's specified validity expiration time, the 
Government may accept an application, whether or not there are negotiations after its 
receipt, unless a written notice of withdrawal is received by the applicant before award. 
Negotiations or discussions conducted after receipt of an application do not constitute a 
rejection or counteroffer by the Government. 


 

- Applicants must set forth full, accurate and complete information as required by this 
NOFO. The penalty for making false statements to the Government is prescribed in 18 
U.S.C. 1001. 


 

- Neither financial data submitted with an application nor representations concerning 
facilities or financing, will form a part of the resulting Cooperative Agreement unless 
explicitly stated otherwise in the agreement. 


 

- USAID reserves the right to perform a pre‐award survey which may include, but is 
not limited to: (1) interviews with individuals to establish their ability to perform 
agreement duties under the project conditions; (2) a review of the prime recipient’s 
financial condition, business and personnel procedures, etc.; and (3) site visits to the 
prime recipient’s institution. 


 

F.2 ADMINISTRATIVE & NATIONAL POLICY REQUIREMENTS 

The cooperative agreement will be administered in accordance with: 

 

For U.S. Non-governmental organizations 

 

• 2 CFR 200 (https://ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl) 



 

• 2 CFR 700 (https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5) 


 

• ADS 303maa, Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-Governmental Organizations 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303maa.pdf) 


 

For Non-U.S. Non-Governmental Organizations 

 

• ADS 303mab, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-Governmental Organizations 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mab.pdf) 


 

For Public International Organizations (PIOs) 

 

• ADS 308mab, Standard Provisions for Cost-Type Awards to PIOs 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1876/308mab.pdf) 


 

USAID/Philippines Regional Office of Acquisition and Assistance (ROAA) will administer this 
award. The AO will designate an AOR to review, concur and/or approve on items outlined in 
Substantial Involvement (Section B.3 of this NOFO). 

 

F.3 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

The Recipient will adhere to all reporting requirements listed below; further, US Non-
governmental organizations need to be in compliance with 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 
(specifically 2 CFR 200.327-329). 

 

The Recipient will submit all reports by the due date for approval from the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR). The Recipient will consult with the AOR on the format and content prior 
to submission. In addition to the reports below, the AOR may request additional information to 
contribute to the internal USAID project reviews. 

 

(a) Program Reporting 


 

The Recipient must submit a copy of each report required by this Agreement to the 
Agreement Officer, the AOR, and the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 
Submission to the DEC must be through the public-facing and searchable DEC Web site 
(http://dec.usaid.gov ). 

 

(1) Annual Implementation Plan 


 

The Recipient must work with USAID to develop annual implementation plans in 
concert with other key USAID/Philippines partners, and are aligned to each USG 
fiscal year of the agreement. The applicant will prepare a draft Year 1 implementation 


plan to be submitted with its application. This draft will be finalized with the AOR 
within 45 days upon completion of the co-development workshop. Subsequent annual 
implementation plans will be submitted within 30 days before the start of the 
succeeding fiscal year. The AOR will review and approve the plan within 15 days 
after receipt of the draft implementation plan. 

 

The implementation plan must include, at a minimum: 

 

• Proposed accomplishments and expected progress towards achieving program results 
and performance measures tied to the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) 
Plan 
• Timeline for implementation of the year’s proposed interventions, including target 
completion dates 
• Information on how interventions will be put in place 
• Gender Action Plan that will define how gender will be integrated in the activity 
cycle 
• Environmental Risk Mitigation Plan which will describe how environmental 
compliance and climate risk management will be integrated into activity interventions 
• Personnel requirements to achieve expected outcomes 
• Details of collaboration with other major partners 
• Annual budget with estimates of projected monthly expenditures 
• Plan for annual three-day pause-and-reflect workshops 


 

(2) Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 


 

The MEL Plan must describe the agreed upon framework of goals, outcomes, and 
outputs for the program, along with performance indicators, baselines and targets 
defined for each, and sex-disaggregated where appropriate. The MEL Plan must 
describe the evaluative work that the implementing partner will conduct for its own 
management decision-making, institutional learning, and accountability purposes (see 
ADS 203.3.1, as revised, for more detailed guidance). 

 

During the first sixty (60) days after the award is made, the Recipient will work 
closely with the USAID AOR to finalize its MEL Plan. The plan must identify 
specific indicators for measuring the following aspects of the recipient’s performance: 

 

• Progress toward meeting program objectives and sub-objectives; and 
• Time frame for achieving these objectives and sub-objectives. 


 

The Recipient will collaborate with the USAID AOR to review/update its MEL Plan, 
and to monitor and report to USAID. 

 

Both quantitative and qualitative indicators need to be developed and special attention 
paid to data sources, collection methods, and data quality assessment. 

 


Program monitoring and evaluation comprises an essential component of this 
cooperative agreement for the following reasons: 

 

• Informs USAID of progress; 
• Enables detailed and on-going design of activities and sub-activities; and 
• Builds counterparts’ capacity to collect and analyze the data for sound 
decision-making. 


 

At a minimum, the MEL Plan must include the following: 

 

• Automated and other methods used to gather, store, manipulate, summarize, 
analyze, and/or report performance data. 
• Procedures for regular communication with USAID regarding the status of 
monitoring activities, including a means for early notification of problems. 
• Means of addressing a discovered lack of progress or success. Procedures will 
focus on learning from mistakes, analyzing them, and ascertaining the reason 
for missteps. 
• A learning and research agenda and how this agenda will help achieve activity 
level results and contribute to national and international knowledge and 
learning. 
• Information about all activities to be monitored under the MEL Plan. The list 
of activities must be provided in a logical framework which: 





 

- Links activities to Agreement results—both those dictated by USAID in 
the program description and lower level or complementary results 
contained in the Recipient’s approach. 
- Describes assumptions being made about the relationship of the activity to 
the Agreement result. 
- Identifies the indicators against which progress is to be measured. Includes 
methods to be used for monitoring. 
- Provides an illustrative schedule for discrete monitoring activities tied to 
the overall program implementation plan. 


 

• Gender Considerations: 


 

To the greatest extent possible, the Recipient should seek to include both men 
and women in all aspects of this program including participation and 
leadership in e.g., meetings, training, etc. The Recipient must collect, analyze 
and submit to USAID sex-disaggregated data and proposed actions that will 
address any identified gender-related issues. 

 

In order to ensure that USAID assistance makes the maximum optimal 
contribution to gender equality, performance management systems and 
evaluations must include gender-sensitive indicators and sex-disaggregated 
data when the technical analyses supporting the Agreement demonstrates that: 


 

- The different roles and status of women and men affect the activities to 
be undertaken; and 
- The anticipated results of the work would affect women and men 
differently. 


 

(3) Sustainability Plan 


 

The Recipient will submit a sustainability plan for the project within the first 60 days 
of the agreement. This plan should describe specific interventions that are expected to 
be sustained after the Cooperative Agreement ends. The sustainability plan will be 
updated annually and progress and updates to the implementation of the plan should 
be reported on quarterly and annually as part of regular reports. 

 

(4) Quarterly Performance Reports 


 

The Recipient will submit quarterly reports that give insight into the progress of 
planned activities. Such reports follow USAID fiscal quarters, i.e., Quarter 1 covers 
October-December; Quarter 2 covers January-March; Quarter 3 covers April-June; 
Quarter 4 covers July-September. The quarterly report is due within 30 days after the 
fiscal quarter’s end. In lieu of the fourth quarter report, the Recipient will submit an 
Annual Progress Report (see below). During the final year of implementation, the 
Recipient will continue to submit quarterly reports except for the fourth quarter when, 
instead of an Annual Report, the Recipient will be required to submit a Final Report 
(see below). 

 

The narrative report will include qualitative and quantitative information describing 
activities carried out and specific results achieved during the quarter. In addition, the 
narrative report will indicate key implementation challenges encountered and how 
they were, or are planned to be, resolved. To the extent where MEL Plan includes 
quarterly targets, this should be reflected in the narrative report. 

 

(5) Annual Progress Reports 


 

The Recipient must submit an annual progress report within 30 days after the end of 
the fiscal year to cover annual performance from the fiscal year. At a minimum, both 
quarterly and annual progress reports will contain: 

 

• Progress (interventions completed, benchmarks achieved, and performance 
standards completed) made since the last report by region and province as 
applicable 
• Problems encountered and whether they were solved or are still outstanding 
• Proposed solutions to new or ongoing problems 
• Success stories 
• Security concerns 



• Information on new opportunities for program expansion 
• Qualitative data on program achievement and results 
• Updated MEL Plan, as an attachment 
• Documentation of the best practices that can be taken to scale 
• Progress to date on sustainability, gender, climate risk management and 
environmental risk mitigation plans 
• Update on monthly expenditures for the quarter vis-à-vis annual budget 


 

(6) Closeout Plan 


 

No later than six (6) months prior to the completion date of the agreement, the 
Recipient will submit a close-out plan for the Agreement Officer (AO) approval. The 
close-out plan shall include: 

 

• Draft property disposition plan 
• Plan for the phase-out of in-country operations 
• Delivery schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the 
agreement 
• Timetable for completing all required actions in the close-out plan, including 
submission date of the final property disposition plan to the AO. 


 

(7) Final Report 


 

The Recipient must submit, within ninety (90) days following the expiration of this 
cooperative agreement, a detailed final report to the AOR, the Agreement Officer and 
other relevant stakeholders. The final report will cover the entire period of the award 
and will include, but is not limited to: 

 

(i) executive summary; 
(ii) overall description of the activities and methods of assistance used under the 
Program during the period of this Cooperative Agreement, and the 
significance of these activities; 
(iii) brief description of the cumulative results towards achieving the program 
objectives and the performance indicators, as well as an analysis of how the 
indicators illustrate the program’s impact on the accomplishment of the 
program’s overall objectives; 
(iv) an assessment of impact of the program in assisting USAID in meeting 
targets, as well as any unmet targets and the reasons for them; 
(v) section reporting on gender, sustainability and institutionalization, 
environmental compliance and climate risk mitigation; 
(vi) success stories; 
(vii) discussion on the issues and problems that emerged during program 
implementation and how they were overcome; 
(viii) cost-effectiveness; 
(ix) lessons learned; and 



(x) recommendations for USAID’s future interventions. 


 

The final/completion report shall also contain an index of all reports and information 
products produced under this agreement. 

 

Within ninety (90) days following the estimated completion date of this award, the 
Recipient will submit one (1) original and two (2) copies of the Final Report to the 
AOR and one (1) copy to the Agreement Officer. In addition, one (1) copy will be 
submitted to the Development Experience Clearinghouse: 

 

• Electronically: http://www.usaid.gov/results-and-
data/informationresources/development-experience-clearinghouse-dec 


 

• By U.S. Postal Service delivery to: 


 

U.S. Agency for International Development 

Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM 

Ronald Reagan Building M. 01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

 

Note: For the Quarterly, Annual and Final Reports, the following essential 
bibliographic information should be included on the cover page: 

 

• Descriptive title; 
• Author/s name/s; 
• Award number; 
• Recipient’s name; 
• Development Objective; and 
• Date of publication or issuance date of the report. 


 

(b) Financial Reporting 


 

(1) Quarterly Financial Report 


 

The Recipient shall submit quarterly financial reports to USAID no later than ten (10) 
days prior the end of each USG fiscal quarter. They should be disaggregated at the 
program area and contain, at a minimum: 

• Total award budget; 
• Total award funds obligated to date; 
• Total funds previously reported as expended by applicant by main line items; 
• Total funds expended in the current quarter by budget line items; 



• Total funds expended (actual plus estimated accrued) towards the end of the 
report period 
• Total un-liquidated obligations by main line items; 
• Unobligated balance of USAID funds; 
• Estimated expenditures for remainder of year; 
• Estimated expenditures for remainder of project; 
• Estimated fund support per province; and 
• Total obligated funds expended by main line items to date. 


 

The Recipient must also submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) quarterly, no 
later than 30 days after the end of the quarter, via electronic format to the to the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.dpm.psc.gov). The Recipient 
must submit a copy of SF‐425 at the same time to the Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR) and the Controller (aidmnlrfsc@usaid.gov). 

 

Electronic copies of SF-425 and instructions for using it can be found at: 

 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ff_report.pdf 

http://www.forms.gov/bgfPortal/docDetails.do?dId=15149 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ffr_instructions.pdf 

 

(2) Final Financial Report 


 

Within 90 days following the estimated completion date of this award, the Recipient 
must submit to the: (a) USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMP-LOC Unit; (b) Agreement 
Officer (manila-roaa-admin@usaid.gov); (c) Controller (aidmnlrfsc@usaid.gov); and 
(c) Agreement Officer Representative (AOR), the final Federal Financial Form (SF-
425) 

 

(3) Foreign Tax Reports 


 

Reporting of foreign taxes under this agreement shall follow the standard provision 
entitled “Reporting Host Government Taxes (December 2014)” of this award 
document. 

 

Host government taxes are not allowable where the Agreement Officer provides the 
necessary means to the recipient to obtain an exemption or refund of such taxes, and 
the recipient fails to take reasonable steps to obtain such exemption or refund. 
Otherwise, taxes are allowable in accordance with the Standard Provision, 
“Applicability of 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 (December 2014),” and must be reported 
as required in this provision. 

 

The Recipient must include this reporting requirement in all applicable sub-
agreements, including subawards and contracts. 

 


F.4 PROGRAM INCOME 

No program income is anticipated under this award. If the successful applicant is a non-profit 
organization or Public International Organization (PIO), any program income generated under 
the award will be added to USAID funding (and any cost-sharing that may be provided, if 
applicable), and used for program purposes. However, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.307 Program 
Income, if the successful Applicant is a for-profit or commercial organization, any program 
income generated under the award will be deducted from the U.S. Government share of this 
award to determine the amount of USAID funding. 

Program income is subject to 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. NGOs or the standard provision entitled 
Program Income for non-U.S. NGOs. 

F.5 BRANDING STRATEGY AND MARKING PLAN: 

It is a federal statutory and regulatory requirement (see Section 641, Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended and 2 CFR 700.16) that all USAID programs, projects, activities, public 
communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under a USAID grant or 
cooperative agreement or other assistance award or sub-award must be marked appropriately 
overseas with the USAID identity. In accordance with ADS 320.3.3 Branding and Marking 
Requirements for Assistance Awards USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, activities, 
public communications, or commodities implemented or delivered under co-funded instruments 
– such as grants, cooperative agreements, or other assistance awards that usually require a cost 
share – generally are “co-branded and co-marked.” 

 

The Apparently Successful Applicant will be required to submit a branding strategy and marking 
plan for the Agreement Officer approval prior to award. The applicant may request a presumptive 
exemption to marking requirements established in 2 CFR 700.16. More information on Branding 

strategy and Marking plan are available at https://www.usaid.gov/branding/assistance-awards. 

 

The branding strategy and marking plan will become a material element of the cooperative 
agreement. Information on USAID’s branding “assistance” applies to this NOFO. ADS Chapter 
320 sections concerning “acquisition” do not apply to this NOFO. ADS Chapter 320 can be found 
on USAID website: http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/320.pdf. 

 

When requesting a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan, the Agreement Officer will establish a 
reasonable time frame for submittal, review, and negotiation. If the Apparently Successful 
Applicant(s) fail(s) to submit or negotiate an acceptable Branding Strategy within the time 
specified by the Agreement Officer, that/those applicant(s) become(s) ineligible for award. 

 

The Agreement Officer will review the proposed Branding Strategy and Marking Plan for 
adequacy to ensure that it complies with the Agency branding and marking guidance that can 
be found at http://www.usaid.gov/branding/ and at 
http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/320.pdf . 

 

Applicants need to include anticipated costs for branding strategy and marking plan in the budget 
and describe these costs in detail to the degree possible in the budget narrative. The Agreement 


Officer will ensure that any estimated costs associated with branding and marking are included 
in the Total Estimated Amount of the grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award. 

 

Pre-Award Terms for the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan are provided in Annex 2 of this 

NOFO. 

 

F.6 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE: 

1) The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include 
environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and 
in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) ADS 201 and ADS 204, which, in part, 
require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified 
prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. Applicant’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 




 

2) In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and 
USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 




 

3) No activity funded under this award will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as 
documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau 
Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 




 

4) The Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) Number 2020-BYE-002 (Annex 1 of this 
NOFO) has been approved for the Activity funding this Cooperative Agreement and 
defines ce terms and conditions for this award. It will cover program activities during the 
implementation period. USAID has determined that a Negative Determination with 
conditions applies to one or more of the proposed activities discussed in Program 
Description. This indicates that if these activities are implemented subject to the specified 
conditions, they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the environment. The 
Recipient shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to 
be funded under this award. 




 

5) As part of its initial Implementation Plan, and all Annual Implementation Plans thereafter, 
the Recipient, in collaboration with the USAID Agreement’s Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall 
review all ongoing and planned activities under this award to determine if they are within the 
scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 




 


6) If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for 
USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving 
written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 




 

7) Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted approval is received from USAID. 




 

Applicants need to account for resources required for implementing and monitoring the 
environmental compliance activities in the technical application and in the budget and describe 
associated costs in detail to the degree possible in the budget narrative. 

 

END OF SECTION F 

 

 

 

 

(This space intentionally left blank) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION G – FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

G.1 Agency Point of Contact 

 

Name: Béatricé M. Condé 

Title: Supervisory Agreement Officer 

Address: Regional Office of Acquisition and Assistance (ROAA), 3/F Annex 2 

 Building, U.S. Embassy Compound, 1201 Roxas Boulevard, Ermita 

 Manila, Philippines 1000 

Email: bconde@usaid.gov 

 

Any prospective Applicant seeking an explanation or interpretation of this NOFO must 
request it in writing by the due date and time specified on the cover page of this NOFO in 
order to allow a reply to reach all prospective Applicants before the submission of their 
Concept Paper. Oral explanations or instructions given before award will not be binding. Any 
information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment of this NOFO if that 
information is necessary in submitting applications or if lack of it would be prejudicial to any 
other prospective Applicants. 

 

Please note that only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of 
USAID/Philippines. 

 

 

END OF SECTION G 

 

 

 

 

(This space intentionally left blank) 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H – OTHER INFORMATION 

 

Applicants must be aware that the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) 
for Fiscal Year 2019 (Pub. L. 115-232) precipitated changes to 2 CFR 200 and USAID Standard 
Provisions for Non-US Nongovernment Organizations. As of August 2020, the changes must be 
incorporated into any award that results from this NOFO. Below is the full text of the standard 
provision for Non-US Nongovernmental Organizations. 

Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment 
(August 2020) 

 a. The Recipient is prohibited from using grant funds, including direct and indirect costs, 
program income, and any cost share to: 

(1) Procure or obtain; 

(2) Extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain; or 

(3) Enter into a contract (or extend or renew a contract) to procure or obtain equipment, services, 
or systems that use covered telecommunications equipment or services as a substantial or 
essential component of any system, or as critical technology as part of any system. 

b. Telecommunication costs and video surveillance costs incurred for telecommunications and 
video surveillance services and equipment such as phones, internet, video surveillance, and cloud 
servers are allowable except for those referenced in paragraph a. above. 

c. Definitions. The terms used in this provision have the following meanings: 

(1) “Covered telecommunication equipment or services” as defined in Pub. L. 115-232, Section 
889, means any of the following: 

i. Telecommunications equipment produced by Huawei Technologies Company or ZTE 
Corporation (or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities). 

ii. For the purpose of public safety, security of government facilities, physical security 
surveillance of critical infrastructure, and other national security purposes, video surveillance 
and telecommunications equipment produced by Hytera Communications Corporation, 
Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Company, or Dahua Technology Company (or any 
subsidiary or affiliate of such entities). 

iii. Telecommunications or video surveillance services provided by such entities or using such 
equipment. 


iv. Telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services produced or provided by an 
entity that the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Director of the National Intelligence 
or the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, reasonably believes to be an entity owned 
or controlled by, or otherwise connected to, the government of a covered foreign country. 

(2) “Covered foreign country” is defined in Pub. L. 115-232, Section 889 as the People’s 
Republic of China. 

(3) “Telecommunications costs” as defined in 2 CFR 200.1 means the cost of using 
communication and telephony technologies such as mobile phones, land lines, and internet. 

d. This provision must be incorporated into all subawards. 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or 
disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this 
application. If, however, an award is made as a result of – or in connection with – 
the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have the right to duplicate, 
use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information 
contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. 
The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet 
numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on 
the title page of this application.” 

 

 

 

(This space intentionally left blank) 

 


Annex 1 - INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE) 

 

2020-BYE-002 

Project/Activity Data: 

 

Project/Activity Name: Pacific Sustainable Coastal Fisheries Activity 

Amendment: No 

Geographic Location(s) (Country): Pacific Island Countries 

Implementation Start Date: o/a 6/1/2020 

End Date: o/a 5/31/2025 

Bureau Tracking ID: 

Tracking ID of Related RCE/IEE (if any): 

Tracking ID of Other, Related Analyses (if any): 

 

Organizational/Administrative Data 

 

Implementing Operating Unit(s): Philippines, Pacific Islands and Mongolia Mission 

Total Estimated Cost: $15 million 

If amended, specify previous funding amount: 

If amended, specify new funding total: 

Prepared by: Rebecca Guieb 

Date Prepared: 4/1/2020 

 

Environmental Compliance Review Data 

 

Environmental Determination(s): 

Categorical Exclusion: [X] Negative Determination with Conditions: [X] 

Positive Determination: [ ] Deferral: [ ] 

IEE Expiration Date: 5/31/2025 

 

Additional Analyses/Reporting Required 

 

Climate Risk Rating(s): Low ___X___ Moderate ___X___ High __X____ 

 


