Issuance Date: March 24, 2021 
Deadline for Submission of Questions: April 1, 2021, 11:59 PM India time 
(response to questions will be provided through amendment#1 at www.grants.gov ) 
Deadline for Submission of Concept Paper: April 23, 2021, 11:59 PM India time 
CATALOG OF FEDERAL DOMESTIC ASSISTANCE (CFDA) No.: 98.001 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) Number: 72038621RFA00004 

Activity Title: Cleaner Air and Better Health (CABH) Activity 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified organizations to fund activity entitled “Cleaner Air and 
Better Health (CABH) Activity”. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. The authority for 
the NOFO is found in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. 

USAID intends to make a single award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this 
funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO, subject to a risk 
assessment. 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity and any 
amendment to it will be posted on www.grants.gov. It is the responsibility of the applicant to 
regularly check the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of 
funding opportunityNOFO and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in 
its entirety. USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or 
conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the 
NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

This NOFO contains three merit review phases: 

Phase 1: Applicants will submit a 10 page concept paper. Based on USAID’s evaluation of the 
Initial Applications, only the top applicants will be invited to participate in Phase 2. 

Phase 2: Selected applicants from Phase 1 will be invited to participate through a video 
conference in an oral presentation to briefly present their proposed technical approach focusing 
on USAID’s questions and clarifications. 

1 | Page 


Phase 3: Based on the evaluation of oral presentations, one or two apparently successful 
applicant/s, will be selected to co-create the full application that would consist of a technical 
and cost application. Based on the apparently successful applicant’s concept, a program 
description will be developed with USAID which will be incorporated into the resulting 
Cooperative Agreement. USAID will evaluate the resulting program description and the 
accompanying cost application from the applicant and grade it as acceptable or not acceptable. 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in section D. USAID intends to 
make an award to the successful and responsible applicant whose application best meets the 
requirements of this NOFO and the Merit Review Criteria contained herein. While one award is 
anticipated as a result of this NOFO, USAID reserves the right to fund any, many or none of the 
applications submitted. The finally selected applicant will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives. Please read each section of the NOFO. 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section C.1. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are 
submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s 
expense. 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

Sincerely, 

/s/ 

Armando Espinosa 
Regional Agreement Officer 
USAID/India 

2 | Page 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 5 
A.1 Authorizing Legislation 5 
A.2 Program Framework 5 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 11 
B.1 Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 11 
B.2 Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 11 
B.3 Anticipated Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 12 
B.4 Substantial Involvement 13 
B.5 Authorized Geographic Code 13 
B.6 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 13 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 14 

C.1. Eligible Applicants 14 

C.2 Cost Share or Leverage 14 
C.3 Other 15 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 16 

D.1. Agency Point of Contact 16 

D.2 Questions and Answers 16 

D.3 General Content and Form of Application 16 

D.4 Application Submission Procedures 16 

D.5 Overall Selection Process 17 

D.6 Content and Form of Application Submission 18 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 30 
E.1 Criteria 30 

E.2 Review and selection Process 30 

E.3 Phase 2 – Oral Presentation 31 

E.4 Phase 3 – Co-Creation 31 

E.5 Final Technical Application/Program Description 32 

E.6 Cost/Business Review 32 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 34 

F.1 Federal Award Notices 34 

F.2 Administrative & National Policy Requirements 34 

3 | Page 


F.3 Reporting Requirements 35 

F.4 Program Income 35 

F.5 Environmental Compliance 35 

F.6 ADS 303.3.35.2 Covered Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Equipment or 
Services (Effective Date: 08/18/2020 37 

F.7 Procurement of “Covered Material” 38 

F.8 Program Reporting 39 

F.9 Branding & Marking 43 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 45 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 46 
ANNEX 1: CERTIFICATIONS, ASSURANCES, OTHER STATEMENTS OF THE 
RECIPIENT AND SOLICITATIONS STANDARD PROVISIONS 47 
ANNEX 2: PAST PERFORMANCE QUESTIONNAIRE 67 
ANNEX 3: PRELIMINARY GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ANALYSIS 
71 
1. Background 71 

2. Main Findings by Domain 72 

2.1 Laws, Policies, Regulations, and Institutional Practices. 72 

2.3 Gender Roles, Responsibilities and Time Use 74 

2.4 Access to and Control over Assets and Resources 76 

2.5 Patterns of Power and Decision-making 77 

3. Analysis Of Issues And Recommendations By Technical Component 78 

4 | Page 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

A.1 Authorizing Legislation 
This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

A.2 Program Framework 
A.2.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the Cleaner Air and Better Health (CABH) activity is to strengthen air pollution 
mitigation and exposure reduction systems in selected regions of India, contributing to a cleaner 
environment and healthier population. Through the CABH activity, USAID/India will support 
the Government of India (GOI) to address air pollution and its health impacts by: supporting 
Indian counterparts in identifying and developing regulatory interventions for improved 
governance on air pollution mitigation and health impacts; leveraging U.S. and Indian 
innovation, finance and expertise for air pollution mitigation measures and reducing exposure to 
air pollution; helping strengthen the science underpinning solutions; and raising awareness 
across stakeholders to drive social and behavioral transformation. 

A.2.2 Problem Statement 
The World Health Organization has declared air pollution a global environmental health 
emergency. In India, it threatens to unravel national development progress and impede the 
country’s Journey to Self-reliance (J2SR). Exposure to air pollution in India is among the 
highest in the world and continues to increase. 

India has made great strides in growing its economy, creating a world-class scientific 
community, and establishing a vibrant private sector. Yet exposure to air pollution in India is 
among the highest in the world and continues to worsen over time. In 2015, an estimated 99.9 
percent of the Indian population lived in areas where air pollution levels exceeded WHO air 
quality guidelines.1 India includes 11 of the world’s 15 most polluted cities,2 a crisis that led to 

1.2 million premature deaths in 2017 according to the 2019 State of Global Air.3 Air pollution 
causes billions of dollars in lost economic productivity. The World Bank estimated the cost of 
air pollution in India at $505 billion per year or 7.7 percent of total GDP in 2013, a 5 factor 
increase from 1990, and labor losses in India due to air pollution were estimated to be 55 billion 
US dollars.4 Deaths and disability from air pollution either matched or exceeded the burden of 
1 https://www.healtheffects.org/publication/gbd-air-pollution-india 

2 2018 World Health Organization database on city level air pollution monitoring for PM 2.5. 

3 Health Effects Institute. 2019. State of Global Air 2019. Special Report. Boston, MA:Health Effects Institute. 

4 World Health Organization (WHO), ‘Household Air Pollution and Health,’ 2018 -https://www.who.int/newsroom/
fact-sheets/detail/household-air-pollution-and-health 

5 | Page 


disease caused by tobacco use. There is growing evidence to show that the health and economic 
effects on women and men differ because of their gendered roles and responsibilities. These 
factors, amongst many, threaten India’s prosperity by increasing pressure on India's social 
services infrastructure, compromising an already challenged workforce, undermining economic 
productivity and further marginalizing those who do not have the means to mitigate 
exacerbating problems due to pollution. 

While it might be tempting to search for a silver bullet or panacea to solve India’s air pollution 
problems, there is no such solution. The sources of air pollution are diverse and varied by time 
and location. Challenges are different in both rural and urban areas for all genders and 
marginalized communities. Energy processes account for a large source of air pollution 
exposure in India, from coal-fired power plants, industrial operations (namely from coal 
combustion), diesel-based backup generation, and indoor biomass burning for cooking and 
heating. Vehicles (inefficient and air-polluting two and three-wheeler motor bikes, cars, trucks, 
and buses) are also a primary contributor to ambient air pollution mostly in urban areas. Other 
sources of air pollution include open burning of agricultural, forest land and solid waste. If India 
is to manage its air pollution challenges, behavior change and improvements to waste 
management systems and infrastructure are of the essence. Reducing pollution at its source is an 
assured tool for tackling air pollution. 

Although mitigation will take time it should be understood that measures are needed to reduce 
air pollution exposure, which disproportionately impacts poor and marginalized populations, 
which have fewer resources immediately. Traditionally the environment sectors have played a 
key role in achieving air quality; however, the public health sector can play an important role by 
increasing awareness on air pollution and reducing exposure which would maximize program 
efforts. Due to these factors, a multi-sectoral response is needed to address this complex issue. 

There is strong momentum building across domestic and international stakeholders to take on 
this challenge. The Government of India released the National Clean Air Programme (NCAP) in 
January of 2019. The strategy proposes a 20-30% reduction targets by 2024 for reducing 
particulate matter of less than 2.5 microns (PM2.5) or 10 microns (PM10) at both the regional 
and urban scales, and identify priority mitigation actions and interventions. 

The US Government interagency is actively collaborating to support India’s efforts to improve 
air quality management and reduce exposure to air pollution and its health impacts through a 
suite of activities. USAID supported Enabling Air Quality program helped in the design, 
implementation and evaluation of pilots that advance evidence-based regulatory reform, 
including the world’s first emissions trading scheme for fine particulate matter in the city of 
Surat in the Indian state of Gujarat. The Environmental Health and Safety Plus Center program 
is helping equip factories to plan, execute and assess interventions that achieve measurable and 
lasting reductions in air pollution emissions. The Clean Air Catalyst program will create a 
replicable data-to-impact methodology consisting of participatory source attribution; structured 
identification of root causes of the most health-damaging air pollution; and interventions to 
reduce the most toxic air pollution sources to improve human health. Understanding how 
different pollutants impact women, men, and marginalized communities differently is critical to 
ensure gender equality and female empowerment and successful implementation of this activity. 

6 | Page 


In addition, USAID is supporting an effort to channel the emerging public outcry about air 
pollution, and the network of local champions and organizations working on air quality, into a 
cohesive, strategic, and action-oriented movement demanding change in up to four cities in 
India. Through a partnership with the SMART Cities Platform, USAID supports the city of 
Indore to manage its air quality by employing citizen research and evidence based 
communications. 

A.2.3 Theory of Change 
The theory of change for CABH is that IF air pollution mitigation systems are strengthened 
AND IF air pollution exposure is reduced THEN the environment would be cleaner and the 
population healthier. In doing so, CABH will contribute toward India’s ability to meet its 
NCAP commitments. 

Through the CABH activity, USAID/India will enhance India’s efforts to reduce pollution and 
address pollution health impacts as envisioned under Development Objective two (DO2) of 
USAID’s India Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) 2020-2024 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1861/India_CDCS_2020-2024.pdf ) 

A.2.4 Objectives and Key Results 
There are two objectives for this activity: 1. Improve air pollution mitigation; 2. Reduce 
exposure to air pollution. Four results are envisioned under each of the two objectives. 

Objective 1: Improve air pollution mitigation 

Reducing pollution requires a complex engagement on a technological, governance, financial, 
and behavioral level, with cooperation among regulators, industry, and civil society. Many 
programs for air pollution mitigation have been initiated in India for air pollution by various 
ministries. However, numerous gaps remain, including bringing these various initiatives and 
others into holistic air quality management frameworks; promoting individual level adoption of 
these interventions; creating an enabled environment where private sectorinitiatives can 
promote these policies; and strengthening the capacity of governmental agencies to actualize 
these policies. 

Under this objective, USAID/India seeks for the CABH activity to mitigate air pollution. 
Mitigation refers to the reduction of air pollutants being emitted into the environment through 
either process changes that prevent the generation of emissions at its source, to the use of air 
pollution control devices that prevent pollutants from being emitted into the environment. 
This objective is grounded in the notion that a combination of tools, ranging from improved 
governance and complementary market-based approaches, to behavior change at the community 
and individual level, to the use of cleaner energy and abatement technologies, can help mitigate 
air pollution. 

The results and illustrative interventions under this objective are provided below: 

7 | Page 


Result 1.1: Improved capacity of decision-makers to use evidence-based approaches for 
air quality management; formulating policy; and implementing and enforcing mitigation 
actions. 

This will include supporting the development, testing and introduction of systematic air 
quality management tools as well as regulatory, policy and other frameworks. 
Illustratively, CABH could support atmospheric modeling, cost-benefit analysis, and 
other tools to enable central, state and local air management bodies to identify cost-
effective solutions. 

Result 1.2: Communities are empowered to advocate and act for improved air quality. 

With the consequences of air pollution felt by both rural and urban communities, 
community action can be mobilized and serve as a powerful tool for improving air 
quality. CABH could support citizens’ movements that are building community demand 
for change and empowering communities (gender balanced) to advocate and act for 
improved air quality. 

Result 1.3: Increased use of market-based and enterprise-led approaches that 

complement traditional regulatory approaches to mitigate air pollution. 

This will include catalyzing private sector participation including incubators/accelerators 
and small and medium enterprises in the development, testing, demonstration and scale-
up of air pollution technologies and practices; and introducing and/or expanding the use 
of innovative finance models, such as development impact bonds and pay-for-results 
mechanisms, to support investment in air pollution technologies and practices. 

Result 1.4: Increased deployment of mitigation technologies and systems, including 
source elimination, cleaner energy and air pollution control devices; improved landscape 
management. 

CABH will support government, private sector and public-private partnerships in 
deploying mitigation technologies and systems. Illustratively, the activity could: (i) help 
further take to scale the Emissions Trading Scheme for air pollution mitigation; (ii) 
support the regulatory design and finance for retrofitting diesel vehicles as India 
leapfrogs to level 6 emission standards; and (iii) promote improved land use and 
agricultural practices that contribute to air pollution, such as reducing crop residue 
burning and rejuvenating degraded landscapes. 

Objective 2: Reduce exposure to air pollution 

Exposure reduction, for the purposes of this activity, refers to processes that reduce the amount 
of air pollution that is absorbed by the public through inhalation, contributing to reduced health 
effects. These processes will include, for example, improved indoor air quality, behavioral 
changes that reduce time spent outdoors during high pollution times, as well as using self


8 | Page 


protection devices such as masks to reduce pollution at the point of inhalation. This objective 
recognizes that a combination of approaches is needed to reduce exposure to air pollution, from 
individual behavioral change to the improvement of indoor air quality. It recognizes the need 
for additional evidence of what health interventions may be successful for reducing exposure, 
such as the effective use of health practitioners (doctors, nurses, community health officers, and 
other frontline health workers) as channels for influencing behavioral change. 

The results and illustrative interventions under this objective are provided below: 

Result 2.1: Improved capacity of decision-makers to use evidence-based approaches for 
reducing exposure and improving health. 

This will support research; stakeholder engagement; feedback loops between researcher, 
decision-makers and users, and so forth to inform policies and practices that promote 
indoor air quality measures. Illustratively, research could be related to developing and/or 
improving building codes that take ventilation and other environmental health factors 
into account. 

Result 2.2: Expanded evidence base for high-impact health interventions. 

This will include research, adaptation and deployment of tools and technologies that will 
lower direct exposure to air pollution, particularly for the most vulnerable (children with 
pneumonia, pregnant women, etc.) such as tools and technologies related to the use of 
personal protection equipment, improved access to cookstoves and more. 

Result 2.3: Increased adoption of behavioral change for exposure reduction. 

Illustrative interventions include supporting local organizations in public education and 
advocacy efforts; engaging healthcare practitioners as messengers; supporting 
community efforts to reduce exposure; involving women to include their view points (a 
change in the social norm), and other efforts to promote behavior change. 

Result 2.4: Improved indoor environment. 

Illustrative interventions include support for promoting the adoption of building codes 
(e.g., for ventilation), promoting cleaner building operations and maintenance, and the 
operationalization of the Ujjwala scheme and other demonstrations that may help 
improve indoor air pollution. 

A.2.5 Proposed Geographic Focus Areas 
In their response to the solicitation, offerors will propose where their interventions will be 
conducted and provide the analysis supporting the geographic focus. Although the offeror can 
propose both urban and rural areas, emphasis should be placed on supporting non-attainment 
cities as identified by NCAP. The selection of geographic location will be finalized during the 
co-creation (Phase 3) and would be subject to MoEFCC approval. 

9 | Page 


A.2.6 Link to Agency Priorities 
The CABH activity is aligned with India Country Development Cooperation Strategy (2020-24) 
and other broader USAID priorities such as the Journey to Self Reliance, Indo-Pacific Strategy, 
Private Sector Engagement Strategy, and Environment and Natural Resources Management 
Framework. 

A.2.7 Guiding Principles 
Coordination: USAID/India and the applicant will finalize the teaming arrangement/ 
consortium framework (if applicable) through the co-creation process. The CABH activity will 
engage with relevant host government ministries. The activity will coordinate with current 
USAID-funded activities and leverage the work of other relevant actors and stakeholders to 
ensure complementarity and avoid duplication of efforts. There may be opportunities to engage 
with the Gandhi-King Development Foundation. 

Gender and Social Inclusion: Activity will widen its impact by taking explicit account of: (1) 
the disproportionate and severe health effects of air pollution on different segments of 
population based on gender, ethnicity, and disability through transition strategies that address 
problems for all the population equally. Please see annex 3 for detailed information on gender 
and social inclusion. 

Flexible and Adaptive Programming: USAID recognizes the importance of thinking critically 
and shifting strategic decisions to respond to emerging development challenges. This activity 
should maintain the flexibility and adaptability to ensure responsiveness to evolving local 
dynamics and to take advantage of opportunities, as well as mitigate challenges in a timely and 
effective manner. This will require a management approach that regularly reassesses the 
operating environment in targeted urban and/or rural areas, to allow any necessary course 
corrections and adjustments to specific ongoing implementation as necessary based on 
information feedback. The activity will be flexible enough to be able to adapt to changing 
circumstances and respond with different approaches, as needed. 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by 
USAID to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development 
Objectives. Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” 
and “Project” as used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and 
implementation of USAID development assistance. 

END OF SECTION A 

10 | Page 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

B.1 Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 
USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability, successful ongoing implementation and at the 
discretion of the Agency, USAID in total government funding intends to provide US$15 Million 
through incremental funding over a five (5) year period. 

USAID reserves the right to change the funding amounts, cycle, and terms of the resulting 
Cooperative Agreement as a result of availability of funds and US Government requirements. 
The Recipient will be notified in writing should such changes occur. 

B.2 Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning: USAID/India intends for the activity to be subject to 
rigorous monitoring, evaluation and learning approach to (a) ensure the intended results and 
impact are being generated; and (b) ensure the tracking and reporting of results to inform 
activity management if, and when, course corrections may be necessary; 

The Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) plan should include the activity’s logic model, 
(logical framework orothers), key performance indicators, including draft targets for each 
indicator and information on data quality assurances; and a calendar of key performance 
management tasks. Further, the plan should describe the process for monitoring, evaluating, and 
learning from implementation to adapt and achieve results. The CABH activity should use 
results-based management and the performance metrics approach as a tool for activity design, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation. 

Tentative list of indicators to monitor results is given below. The final list of indicators will be 
developed during the co-creation (Phase 3). 

Air pollutants, such as PM2.5 or PM10, reduced through interventions supported by USAID 

● 
Percentage of households in targeted areas that implement at least one practice to reduce 
health impact of air pollution 
● 
Projected greenhouse gas emissions reduced or avoided through 2030 from adopted 
laws, policies, regulations, or technologies related to clean energy as supported by USG 
assistance 
● 
Projected greenhouse gas emissions reduced or avoided from adopted laws, policies, 
regulations, or technologies related to sustainable landscapes as supported by USG 
assistance 
● 
Number of people reached with communications and knowledge dissemination activities 
(sex and social group disaggregated) 
11 | Page 


● 
Number of new evidence products generated 
● 
Number of laws, policies, regulations, or guidelines, developed/implemented/adopted 
with USG support 
● 
Number of tools, innovations, and practices adopted for mitigating the air pollution 
sources in various sectors 
● 
Percentage of female participants in USG-assisted programs designed to increase access 
to productive economic resources (assets, credit, income or employment) 
● 
Number of persons trained with USG assistance to advance outcomes consistent with 
gender equality or female empowerment through their roles in public or private sector 
institutions or organizations 
● 
Amount of investment mobilized (in USD) for addressing air pollution projects as 
supported by USG assistance 
● 
Number of private sector partnerships established for technology adoption and 
implementation 
● 
Number of institutions with improved capacity to address air pollution issues as 
supported by USG assistance. 
Annual Pause and Reflect session to inform annual reporting and the following year work plans. 
These Pause and Reflect sessions serve to review what types of interventions may be necessary 
to adjust course. A mid-term and final evaluation will be conducted by a third party as per 
USAID guidelines.The mid-term evaluation will be undertaken in year two of the project 
implementation to assess the activity Theory of Change (TOC), risks and assumptions, and 
review the progress towards expected results and make mid-course corrections, if needed. The 
evaluation will measure processes, early progress on getting results, modification in the project 
implementation, if any. 

Considering the progress and requirement, a final performance evaluation will be undertaken to 
assess relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability and results against the proposed 
objectives of the project. 

USAID/India recognizes that development efforts yield positive change more quickly if they are 
coordinated and collaborative, test promising new approaches in a continuous search for 
improvement, and build on what works, while eliminating what does not. The recipient must 
therefore propose and implement a Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation (CLA) approach in 
the project to continuously assess the activity’s causal pathways, target outcomes, and adjust the 
interventions and approach as necessary to yield the most effective course of action. The CLA 
Plan must clearly relate to the MEL Plan. 

B.3 Anticipated Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 
The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date will be upon the 
signature of the award, on or about September, 2021. 

12 | Page 


B.4 Substantial Involvement 5 
In accordance with ADS 303.3.11, USAID will remain substantially involved over the life of 
the Cooperative Agreement to assist the Recipient in achieving the expected outcomes and 
results of the program. Some examples of potential areas of substantial involvement during 
performance include the following: 

● 
Approval of recipient's implementation plans; 
● 
Approval of the recipient's monitoring and evaluation plans; 
● 
Approval of key recipient personnel; and 
● 
Joint participation will be necessary to ensure achievement of key objectives during the 
performance of the activity. 
B.5 Authorized Geographic Code 
The authorized geographic code for the procurement of services and commodities is 937. Code 
937 is defined as the United States, the recipient country (India), and developing countries, 
but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. There are currently no prohibited source 
countries, but the list is updated regularly and can be found here: 

http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1864/310mac.pdf 

B.6 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 
The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the CABH activity 
which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful applicant/recipient will be responsible for 
ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective 
administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The 
Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent 
with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 

END OF SECTION B 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

5 This Substantial Involvement section is subject to change following the Co-Creation Workshop and submission 
of the Final Application (Phase 3) 

13 | Page 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

C.1. Eligible Applicants 
This funding opportunity is unrestricted and is open to all eligible U.S and non-U.S. nongovernmental 
organizations (other than those from foreign policy restricted countries), 
including foundations, institutions of higher education, consortiums and public international 
organizations, etc. Individuals are not eligible to participate. 

Pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to award profit under assistance 
instruments such as Cooperative Agreements. While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant 
to 2 CFR 700.13(A)1), Prohibition against Profit, no profit will be paid to any for-profit entity 
receiving or administering Federal financial assistance as a recipient or subrecipient. 

USAID welcomes organizations that have not previously received financial assistance from 
USAID to submit their applications. 

Though not required during the Phase 1 and Phase 2 application process, the “Apparently 
Successful Applicant6” (ASA) must provide a valid DUNS number in the SF-424 form that is to 
be submitted along with their full application. The ASA should also have successfully registered 
in SAM (System for Award Management) prior to award. For those who have previously 
registered in SAM, they must renew and maintain an active SAM registration during the time 
they have concept notes or applications under consideration by a Federal awarding agency, or 
during an active Federal award. 

C.2 Cost Share or Leverage7 
Under this NOFO there is not a mandatory cost share requirement. However, a minimum 
leverage of 25% of the award amount is required. 

What is Leverage? 
Leveraging represents all of the non-USAID resources that are expected to be applied to a 
program which will enable the activity to engage in interventions that are of shared interest and 
will enable the interventions to be continued after the CABH ends. Leveraging may include 
financial contributions, third party contributions, the value of donated services and property, 
including intellectual property; or may be anything of value that can be measured in some form 
that permits evaluation of the contribution’s impact on achieving desired results. Third parties 
can include the host government and the private sector. 

6 Apparently Successful Applicant(s). The applicant for USAID funding recommended for an award after the merit 
review, but who has not yet been awarded cooperative agreement by the Agreement Officer. Apparently successful 
applicant status confers no right and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award, which still must be obligated 
by the Agreement Officer. 

7 For more information on Leverage, please see: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1861/India_RFIP_CostShareProgramIncomeLeverage.pdf 

ADS 303.3.27 Public-Private Partnerships 

14 | Page 


What is Private Sector? 
For the purposes of CABH, the “private sector” will be defined broadly as: for-profit, 
commercial entities and their affiliated foundations; financial institutions, investors and 
intermediaries; business associations and cooperatives; micro, small, medium and large 
enterprises that operate in the formal and informal sectors; American, local, regional, and 
multinational scale businesses; and for-profit approaches that generate sustainable income (e.g., 
a venture fund run by a non-governmental organization (NGO) or a social enterprise). 

What is Cost-Share? 
Cost-share is a subset of leveraging. However, cost-share becomes a condition of the award 
when it is made part of the approved award budget. Cost sharing must be verifiable from the 
recipient’s records, is subject to the requirements of 2 CFR 200.306, and is auditable. If the 
recipient does not meet its cost sharing requirement, it can result in questioned costs. For 
USAID/India, cost share has been further defined as those contributions provided by the 
recipient organization itself (either cash or in-kind). 

C.3 Other 
An organization may submit only one (1) concept paper as a prime or consortium leader under 
this NOFO. However, organizations may be part of other consortiums as a sub-recipient. 

C.4 Pre-award Survey / Risk Assessment 
The ASA will be responsible for ensuring achievement of the objectives described in the 
NOFO. Therefore, the AO will decide on whether to subject the ASA to a pre-award survey, 
and based on the results, will make a determination if the prospective recipient is a responsible 
entity, i.e., whether it has the necessary organization, experience, adequate accounting and 
operational controls, and technical skills—or ability to obtain them—in order to achieve the 
objectives of the project and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. The ASA must 
agree to practice mutually agreed-upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets 
provided or funded by USAID. In the absence of a positive risk assessment, an award can 
ordinarily not be made. However, in rare cases, an award can be made with “Specific 
Conditions” (as in 2 CFR 200.207), but only where it appears likely that the applicant can 
correct the deficiency within a reasonable time period. 

Note: A pre-award survey does not commit USAID to make any award. 

END OF SECTION C 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

15 | Page 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

D.1. Agency Point of Contact 
Mr. Armando Espinosa 

Agreement Officer 

aespinosa@usaid.gov 

D.2 Questions and Answers 
Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted by email to indiarco@usaid.gov, with a 
copy to vvats@usaid.gov no later than the date and time indicated on the cover sheet, or as per 
any amendment to furnish information regarding this NOFO. Questions and Concept Paper 
file/s submission must be compatible with Microsoft (MS) Office in a MS Windows 
environment and/or Adobe Acrobat (.pdf). The subject of each e-mail must read as: 
NOFO #72038621RFA00004 - Cleaner Air and Better Health (CABH) 

D.3 General Content and Form of Application 
Applicants are expected to review, understand, and comply with all aspects of the NOFO. 
Applicants must ensure the necessary documents are complete and received at USAID on time. 
All submissions received by the stated deadlines in the NOFO will be reviewed in accordance 
with the review criteria contained in Section E of this NOFO. Failure to do so may result in the 
submission being considered non-responsive and will not be reviewed. 

Submissions must be in electronic format. Applicants’ authorized representatives are to sign 
their names (manually or digitally) on the cover pages of their submissions, as well as in 
required certifications. For a submission to be considered timely, the electronic transmission 
must be submitted by email to indiarco@usaid.gov, with a copy to vvats@usaid.gov and 
received by the USAID/India internet server no later than the date and time indicated on the 
cover sheet of this NOFO. 

D.4 Application Submission Procedures 
The following provides the estimated timing for conducting the merit review process. This 
timeline is subject to change: 

Submission/Action Estimated Date of Submission and/or 
Activity 
Phase 1 Submission of Concept Paper 04/23/2021 
Phase 2 Oral Presentation 05/25/2021 - 05/28/2021 
Phase 3 Co-Creation Workshop 06/21/2021-07/09/2021 

16 | Page 


Receive Full Application (Technical 
and Cost Application) 07/26/2021 
It is highly recommended that applicants read the entire NOFO before submitting an 
application. Respond to Merit Review criteria as appropriate and comply with all aspects of the 
NOFO. Failure to do so will be at the Applicant’s risk. 

D.5 Overall Selection Process 
The purpose of having three Merit Review phases is to identify an Applicant that will have the 
greatest chance of success to achieve the activity objectives. 

Below is the process diagram for this NOFO. 
Merit Review Phase 1 - Concept Paper: Applicants will be invited to submit a Concept Paper, 
including a notional budget estimate. Information regarding the Concept Paper submission is in 
SECTION D.6 of this NOFO. 

Phase 1 is the submission and review of a written concept paper. Concept Papers will be 
reviewed for technical soundness, organizational and management approach and the applicant’s 
institutional capability and past experience. The highest rated concept paper applicants will be 
invited to participate in Phase 2. 

In the event USAID determines that none of submitted Concept Papers are acceptable, 
USAID will issue an amendment to seek a second round of interested applicants. 

Merit Review Phase 2 - Oral Presentation: Selected Applicants will be invited to orally 
present their concepts through videoconference to be held approximately ten (10) days after 
being notified that their concept paper was accepted for Phase 2. This oral presentation is a 
requirement. The format, technical requirements, and videoconference information will be made 
available to those Applicants invited to participate in the oral presentations. The Applicant’s 
concept paper author/s and lead technical backstops must be part of the presentation team. 

USAID will not be responsible for costs associated with presentation. 

17 | Page 


One or two applicants will be selected from the Merit Review Phase 2 as the Apparently 
Successful Applicant (ASA). The ASA will be notified by letter approximately two (2) weeks 
after completion of oral presentations. The ASA will be invited to participate in Phase 3. 

At the completion of Phase 2, the competitive process of ADS 303 will be satisfied. 

Merit Review Phase 3 - Application co-creation: Approximately one (1) week after phase 2, 
ASA will receive a notification for a week long co-creation workshop to be hosted by 
USAID/India via video conference to develop the technical and cost application. Participants in 
this co-creation workshop will include the ASA, USAID, and potentially other stakeholders 
such as MoEFCC. Additional information regarding the logistics and content of the workshop 
will be provided as part of the ASA Notification Letter. Based on the results of the final review, 
USAID will select the Apparently Successful Applicant (ASA). 

After the workshop, ASA will continue to work remotely to refine its approach and will 
complete the technical application (including the Program Description and other elements) and 
the final cost application to be submitted within one (1) week of the end of the co-creation 
workshop. 

USAID will review the technical and cost application, and provide additional questions, if any, 
within one (1) week. 

USAID reserves the right to ask two or more applicants to work collaboratively on a program 
description and cost application if, in USAID’s opinion, combining their concepts will result in 
a more effective overall program. 

No funding will be made available prior to the award of the Cooperative Agreement. 
Applicants, including the organization selected to collaboratively develop the Program 
Description, are responsible for all costs related to the oral presentation phase and the co-
creation workshop. Once the award is signed, the implementing partner may start incurring 
costs. Applicants not selected for the consecutive phase will be notified at the end of each 
phase. Unsuccessful applicants may request additional information following such notification. 

D.6 Content and Form of Application Submission 
(a) Phase 1 – Concept Paper Content and Format: 
The concept paper must demonstrate an understanding of the activity and introduce the 
applicant’s strategy and methodology, including its strategic approach and realistic yet 
innovative interventions. 

Applicants must format their Concept Paper as follows: 

● 
Spacing: Singled-spaced; 
● 
Font: Times New Roman, 12 points; 
● 
Margins: one-inch margins on all sides; 
● 
Paper Size: 8.5 inches x 11 inches; 
18 | Page 


● 
any graphs, charts, exhibits, tables, etc. contained in the body of the concept paper shall 
be numbered and included in the stated page limits (see below). Table font may be 
reduced to Times New Roman, 10-point. 
Concept Papers should be no more than 10 pages, exclusive of cover page, table of contents and 
annexes. They must be presented taking into account and in the order of the technical evaluation 
criteria found in Section E.2: 

● 
Cover Page (not included in the page count) and must contain— 
❖ Project Title 
❖ Notice of Funding Opportunity number
❖ Name, address and telephone number of the Organization (primary or lead) 
❖ Proposed consortium members
❖ Contact Person’ Name and Signature, Title/Position, Email address, phone nos. OR 
❖ Name and Signature of Individual authorized to negotiate terms, conditions and 
countersign the award; Title/Position; Email address; telephone nos. 
❖ DUNS, TIN and, if applicable, LOC number. 
● 
Annexes (not included in the page count)
❖ Acronym List/Definition (not to exceed 1 page) 
❖ Timeline (not to exceed 1 page)
❖ Organizational chart/Staffing plan (general, not to exceed 1 page) 
❖ Past performance (1 page per sub-awardee/partner) 
❖ Other charts, graphs, tables, data or information considered essential to the 
application (not to exceed two pages)
❖ Proposed Notional Budget - estimated cost summary, direct, and indirect costs by 
the applicant and sub-awardees/partners (not to exceed one page) 
● 
Technical Approach (included in the page count) – 
Applicants must describe how they propose to achieve the objectives and elaborate on how 
the proposed technical approach is the most effective way to address the intent of the NOFO. 
At a minimum, the applicant must provide: 

a. An understanding of the air pollution problem in India and its impact, the Government 
of India priorities in addressing air pollution, the key stakeholders, and the challenges 
and opportunities for mitigating air pollution and its health impacts. 
b. A technical approach to achieving the objectives and results and the proposed 
strategies/interventions. 
c. A discussion regarding where interventions will be conducted and provide the analysis 
supporting the geographic focus. 
d. A plan for collaboration with GOI and other stakeholders. 
e. A plan for leveraging funds and private sector engagement in helping achieve the 
objectives of the activity. 
f. A plan for sustainability (how the project will be supported and can continue without 
donor funding) and gender integration. 
19 | Page 


g. A list of tentative indicators and targets (a maximum of 5) that would be crucial for 
achieving the project objectives. 
h. A proposed timeline, i.e. duration or time needed to complete the proposed 
interventions. This duration should not exceed 5 years. 
● 
Organizational Management and Staffing Plan (included in the page count) 
USAID/India does not expect one organization to have all of the professional skills, services, 
and knowledge base required to meet the results; it is for this reason consortiums are 
encouraged. The Applicant should clearly define the value each consortium member brings, 
describe the skills and capacity of each consortium member, and how they complement one 
another. 

USAID/India recommends the key personnel positions to be between 3-5. Any number above 
that should be strongly supported by the technical and management approach. The Applicant 
should also briefly mention how the skill sets of their proposed key personnel will contribute to 
achieving the objectives and results of the NOFO. 

The Applicant should succinctly outline an inclusive leadership approach that will create a 
shared common vision and purpose that builds trust and recognizes the value and 
contribution of all consortium members . 

● 
Institutional Capability and Past Performance (included in the page count) 
USAID/India understands that achievement of desired outcomes relies on the overall 
performance of an organization. For this reason, USAID/India will evaluate both the Applicant 
and all proposed consortium members. Not only will technical capacity be examined, but also 
the ability of each consortium member to work with each other, focused on a common purpose. 
Past performance information must be provided related to the specific technical nature of the 
activity. The Applicant must provide recent performance information for each consortium 
member (as an Annex; no longer than one page per organization). The Applicant is strongly 
encouraged to provide specific examples of significant impact of their past projects and how 
cooperation in prior partnerships/consortia contributed to that impact. 

USAID will determine the relevance (complexity, scope, size and magnitude) of 
similar performance information as a predictor of probable performance under the subject 
requirement. USAID will consider relevant projects successfully performed during the 
past 3 to 5 years to be “recent performance information”. 

The Applicant should address the following points: 

1. Demonstrated successful experience in managing and implementing similar programs, in 
size and scale, preferably in South and South East Asia; 
2. Timeliness of performance, cost, and scope; and 
3. How the Headquarters management team contributed to success, if applicable. 
20 | Page 


(b) Phase 2 – Oral Presentation Instructions 
Based on USAID’s merit review of Concept Papers, only Applicant/s whose concept papers are 
rated high will be invited to an oral presentation via video conferencing. The order of 
presentation among the selected Applicants will be randomly determined by the Agreement 
Officer. 

Applicants who will be invited to the Oral Presentations will be notified promptly as to the date 
of their scheduled presentation. They should expect at least one(1) week notice before their 
scheduled oral presentation. At the time of the invitation, USAID will provide the initial 
discussion items based on the review of Concept Papers. 

Oral Presentations are a condition of award as technical discussions will also occur at this stage. 
The video conference joining instruction will be provided prior to the scheduled date. 

The audience for the Oral Presentation will consist of the Selection Committee (SC) and the 
Agreement Officer. The Agreement Officer will chair the Oral Presentations. While the Concept 
Paper will be presented in PowerPoint format, the remaining discussions will be in Question 
and Answer (Q&A) format with some time for consultation among members of the presenting 
team. Each team member should be an expert and should use the PowerPoint to present the 
salient/important points of the Concept Paper without reading the slide contents verbatim to the 
audience. Team members must be able to actively participate in the discussion of subsequent 
Q&A. 

The Oral Presentation Agenda will be shared with the applicants who reach Phase 2. Each oral 
presentation will be evaluated and scored by the SC in accordance with the merit review criteria 
set forth under Section E.3 of this NOFO. In the presentation, the applicant should summarize 
their concept note while also addressing the questions raised by USAID on concept note 
submitted in Phase 1. During oral presentation the applicant should also explain how data 
collection, analysis and reporting of performance data will be managed under the project; and 
how monitoring and evaluation data will be shared and used to inform program learning and 
adaptive management. In addition, in accordance with the Guiding Principle on Learning and 
Adapting, the Applicant should explain how it will utilize an adaptive learning approach to 
ensure lessons gleaned from performance and context monitoring are incorporated into the 
activity. The MEL approach should describe how routine assessments and internal evaluations 
will be used to inform programmatic decision-making.The presentation should also give an 
expanded list of indicators and targets (in addition to the five provided in the concept note 
(Phase 1)) which are significant in achieving the activity results.The applicants selected for oral 
presentation are required to present their detailed leverage plan. 

Applicant Participants 

The Applicant’s concept paper author/s and lead technical backstops must be part of the 
presentation team. Selected Applicant is also highly encouraged to include participants from 
proposed consortium members (if applicable). Selected Applicants are limited to five 
participants and must be present for the presentation via video conference on the date and time 

21 | Page 


specified (to be provided in the ASA Notification Letter for Phase 2). 

Notification 

Upon completion of the oral presentations, USAID will inform the highly rated Applicant/s that 
its application has been selected to proceed to the next stage of the review process. For the 
selected applicant(s), USAID will provide a written summary (feedback) of their Oral 
Presentation/Discussion to further guide the co-creation workshop preparation. Unsuccessful 
Applicants will have the opportunity to request additional information following a notification 
that they were not selected to proceed to the next phase. 

USAID reserves the right to select another applicant from the pool of Selected Applicants in 
phase 2 in case final agreement is not reached with the initially selected ASA in Phase 3. 

(c) Phase 3 - Co-creation Workshop Instructions 
The highly rated Applicant/s will develop the Program Description for the resulting Cooperative 
Agreement in collaboration with USAID/India. Approximately two weeks after the notification, 
a one-week co-creation workshop will be hosted by USAID/India. The workshop will be 
conducted through videoconferencing and other forms of remote communication. This 
workshop, participants will include the highly rated Applicant/s, USAID, and potentially other 
stakeholders, will bring together the selected technical approach to further define program 
activities. The highly rated Applicant/s will make a determination as to who will be the 
appropriate representatives from its team/consortium. Other stakeholder inclusion in the 
workshop will be determined by USAID at a later date (but before the workshop dates), and 
likely set forth in the ASA Notification Letter for Phase 3. 

The Program Description should include, at a minimum, expanded information on the 
Applicant’s Technical Approach and Organizational Management and Staffing. In addition, the 
Program Description will articulate its strategies in implementing its Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning Methodology that will facilitate adapting learning and management (“Pause and 
Reflect”). The Applicant must also demonstrate how it will apply adaptive management 
techniques to inform program management and key decisions. 

A highly rated applicant which may be the ASA should also anticipate commencing budget 
formulation during this workshop, once a programmatic framework is in place, which clearly 
illustrates how the ASA will accomplish the activity objectives. Additional logistics and content 
of the workshop will be provided as part of the ASA Notification Letter for Phase 3. 

Phase 3 – Technical and Cost/Business Application 

Upon completion of the Co-creation Workshop, the ASA will be notified to submit a final 
Technical and Cost/Business Application. Only electronic submission via email to the Agency 
Point of Contact at indiarco@usaid.gov with a copy to vvats@usaid.gov will be accepted. 

22 | Page 


(1) Technical Application Instruction 
The ASA will develop its Technical Application, which will be the Program Description of the 
resulting Cooperative Agreement in collaboration with USAID. The Technical Application is 
the most important part of consideration in making the award decision. It must demonstrate the 
Applicant’s capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this activity. It must 
be specific, complete and presented concisely. The technical applications should not be more 
than 45 pages. 

Detailed format and content of the Technical Application will be developed together by the 
ASA and USAID. 

The Technical Application will include the Program Description co-created during the Co-
creation Workshop. 

As part of the final Technical Application, the ASA will also furnish the following (included in 
the 45 page limit): 

● 
Gantt Chart of Program Activities 
● 
Rapid Start-Up Plan 
● 
Updated Program Organizational Chart 
● 
Curriculum Vitae of Key Personnel and other pertinent staff (management and technical 
personnel) named in the Organizational Chart 
● 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 
● 
Draft Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 
● 
Environmental and climate risk mitigation 
(2) Cost/Business Application Instruction 
The Cost/Business Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
The Applicant shall submit a budget broken down by program years and in detailed costs for 
implementation of the program including the subrecipient's cost. The excel sheet should include 
a summary budget. The budget breakdown must be presented in an unlocked Microsoft Excel 
(version 2000 or later) spreadsheet with no hidden or locked cells/sheets. The budget 
breakdown must be accompanied by a budget narrative which provides in detail the 
assumptions made for each of the cost elements. The application must provide evidence that the 
funds requested are reasonable and would be used in a cost-effective manner. 

The Cost/Business Application must contain the following: 

(i) Cover Page – containing the same information as the Technical Application cover page. 
(ii) A summary of the budget must be submitted using Standard Form 424, 424A and 424B. 
Forms can be retrieved from: 
23 | Page 


Instructions for SF424 
http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424instructions.
html 
Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 
https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 
Instructions for SF424A 
http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 
Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 
https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 
Instructions for SF424B 
http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 
Assurances (SF424B) 
https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

The cost application must consist of a summary budget in US dollars. The Applicant must sign 
and submit the cost application standard form number SF-424 and SF-424A. 

(iii) Detailed/itemized budget breakdown (provided in spreadsheet) 
The budget breakdown should be presented along the following line items: 
Line Item Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 
5 
Total 
I. Personnel 
II. Fringe Benefits 
III. Allowance 
IV. Travel and 
Transportation 

24 | Page 


V. Trainings and 
workshop 
VI. Equipment and 
Supplies 
VII. Contractual 
VIII.. Other Direct Costs 
IX. Total Direct Costs 
X. Indirect Costs (i.e., 
overhead, G&A, etc.) 
XI. Total Federal Cost 

Detailed breakdown should include the following: 

• Personnel – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. Direct salaries, wages and allowances must ’include position title, 
salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors. Specify the budget for the 
portion of the Activity to be passed through to any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 
for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or 
contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as the 
Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. The name, 
daily and annual salary, expected level of effort of each person charged to the 
program; same information should be provided for Consultants. 
• Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved 
by an agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide 
evidence of its approval. If an Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate 
approved, the Applicant must propose a rate and explain how the Applicant 
determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a detailed 
breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the 
costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 
• Allowances: Allowances must be broken down by specific type and by person and 
must be in accordance with the Applicant’s policies. All salaries, benefits and 
allowances must be based on written compensation policies of the organization. 

25 | Page 


Allowances should be in accordance with the applicant’s policies and the applicable 
regulations and policies. Explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. If the 
organization has standing policies across all projects for annual salary escalations 
that exceed current inflation rates, those policies and the effective date of those 
policies must be provided with the application. The Applicant must also confirm that 
the policy applies to all staff across all projects. 

• Travel and Transportation: Travel, per diem and other transportation expenses must 
be detailed in the financial plan to include the number of international trips, from 
where to where, number of per diem days and rates. Per diem and other travel 
allowances must be based on written travel policies of the employer organization 
(Applicant may choose to refer to the Federal Standardized Travel Regulations for 
cost estimates). 
• Equipment: Detail all equipment to be purchased, including the type of equipment, 
the manufacturer, the unit cost, the number of units to be purchased and the expected 
geographic source. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment 
and supplies and the basis for the estimates. 
• Supplies: Detail all materials and supplies expected to be purchased, including type, 
unit cost, and number of units. The budget narrative must include the purpose of 
supplies and the basis for the estimates. 
• Contractual: Detail of all contractual, sub-recipients and sub-grants. Separate budget 
breakdown (using the same line item breakdown of the prime Applicant) for each 
sub-recipient/sub-award 
• Indirect cost: must be supported with information (i.e., Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate 
Agreement) to substantiate the calculation of the indirect cost. 
• Other Direct Cost: This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as 
report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as 
well as any other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the Activity proposed 
by the applicant. The applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of 
any proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of 
the Activity, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be 
minimal. 
• For commercial organizations, no profit or fee shall be included in the budget. All 
reasonable and allowable expenses, both direct and indirect, which are related to the 
program and are in accordance with applicable cost principles under 2 CFR 200 and 
2 CFR 700 
(iv) Budget Narrative 
The budget narrative should explain all budget assumptions and how the costs are derived. It 
26 | Page 


will provide information regarding the basis of estimates for each line item, including reference 
to source used to estimate the costs (i.e., organization’s policy, payroll document, vendor 
quotes, etc.) 

(v) Other administrative documentation 
a. Evidence of responsibility 
The Agreement Officer requires from the Applicant certain documents to be submitted in order 
to determine the Applicant’s responsibility as well as to assess USAID’s risk should an award 
be made. The information submitted shall substantiate that the Applicant: 

• Has adequate financial, management and personnel resources and systems or the ability to 
obtain such resources as required during the performance of the award; 
• Has the ability to comply with the award conditions, taking into account all existing and 
currently prospective commitments of the Applicant, non-governmental and governmental; 
• Has a satisfactory record of performance. Past relevant unsatisfactory performance is 
ordinarily sufficient to justify a finding of non-responsibility, unless there is clear evidence 
of subsequent satisfactory performance; 
• Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; and 
• Is otherwise qualified and eligible to receive a cooperative agreement under applicable 
laws and regulations. 
b. Indirect cost rate justification 
A copy of the Applicant organization’s current Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement 
(NICRA), if it has one with a U.S. Federal Agency. Applicant and proposed subawardee(
s)/partner(s) that do not currently have a NICRA from their cognizant agency (USAID 
or another U.S. Federal Agency) must also submit copies of the partners’ financial reports for 
the previous 3-year period, which have been audited by a certified public accountant or other 
auditor satisfactory to USAID. 

● 
Reviewed financial statements that provide the user with comfort that, based on the 
accountant’s review, the accountant is not aware of any material modifications that should 
be made to the financial statements for the statements to be in conformity with the 
applicable financial reporting framework. During a review engagement, the Accountant 
obtains limited assurance that there are no material modifications that should be made to 
the financial statements. Therefore, the objective of a review of the financial statements is 
to obtain limited assurance that there are no material modifications that should be made to 
the financial statements. A review does not contemplate obtaining an understanding of the 
entity’s internal control; assessing fraud risk; testing accounting records; or other 
procedures ordinarily performed in an audit. The CPA issues a report stating the review 
was performed in accordance with Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review 
Services; that management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the 
financial statements in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework and 
for designing, implementing and maintaining internal control relevant to the preparation. 
27 | Page 


● 
Audited financial statements that provide the user with the auditor’s opinion that the 
financial statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with the 
applicable financial reporting framework. In an audit, the auditor is required by auditing 
standards generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAS) to obtain an 
understanding of the entity’s internal control and assess fraud risk. The auditor also 
corroborates the amounts and disclosures included in the financial statements by obtaining 
audit evidence through inquiry, physical inspection, observation, third-party 
confirmations, examination, analytical procedures and other procedures. The auditor 
issues a report that states that the audit was conducted in accordance with GAAS, the 
financial statements are the responsibility of management, provides an opinion that the 
financial statements present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the 
company and the results of operations are in conformity with the applicable financial 
reporting framework (or issues a qualified opinion if the financial statements are not in 
conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework. The auditor may also issue 
a disclaimer of opinion or an adverse opinion if appropriate). 
Applicants that have not received a grant, cooperative agreement or contract from the U.S. 
Government are required to submit a copy of their accounting manual. 

c. Proof of Business Registration to conduct business in India 
d. The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with 
their application: 
(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the Recipient” 
document found at https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf. 
((2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of 
Compliance if your organization’s systems have been certified by 
USAID/Washington’s Office of Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 
e. Proof of Duns and SAM registration. 
USAID may not award to an Applicant until the Applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. The 
Applicant is required to: 

● 
Be registered in SAM before submitting its full application 
● 
Provide valid unique identifier (DUNS number) in its application; and, 
● 
Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during 
which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a Federal 
awarding agency. 
28 | Page 


The registration process may take several weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are 

encouraged to obtain them early to be eligible for an award under this NOFO. 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

Completion of an early registration does not constitute any commitment on the part of the U.S. 

Government to make an award. 

f. Consortium arrangements 
If the Applicant has established a consortium or another legal relationship among its partners, the 
Cost/Business application must include a copy of the legal relationship between the parties. The 
agreement should include a full discussion of the relationship between the Applicant and SubApplicant(
s) including identification of the Applicant with whom USAID will work with for 
purposes of Agreement administration, identity of the Applicant which will have accounting 
responsibility, how Agreement effort will be allocated and the express agreement of the 
principals thereto to be held jointly and severely liable for the acts or omissions of the other. 

g. Negotiation 
Upon consideration of award or during the negotiations leading to an award, Applicants may be 

required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the Agreement Officer to 

make an affirmative determination of responsibility. Applicants should not submit the 

information below with their applications! The information in this section is provided so that 

Applicant may become familiar with additional documentation that may be requested by the 

Agreement Officer: 

● 
Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable. 
● 
Whether the organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting 
manual and personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, 
promotion, leave, differentials, etc., submitted under this section have been reviewed 
and approved by any agency of the Federal Government, and if so, provide the 
name, address, and phone number of the cognizant reviewing official. The Applicant 
should provide copies of the same. 
END OF SECTION D 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

29 | Page 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

E.1 Criteria 
All applications will be reviewed in accordance with the review criteria set forth below. The 
purpose of the merit process is to identify an Applicant with the best approach to achieve the 
CABH Activity objectives and results, as described in Section A. 

The criteria presented below have been tailored to the requirements of this NOFO. Applicants 
should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters that Applicants should 
address in their applications, and (b) set the standards against which applications will be 
evaluated. 

The criteria listed below are presented so that Applicants will know which areas require 
emphasis in the preparation of their applications during the appropriate phase. 

E.2 Review and selection Process 
Phase 1 – Concept Paper 
The concept paper should be written from a comprehensive viewpoint that shows innovations 
and approaches proposed by the Applicant and lays out how the Applicant is uniquely capable 
of achieving the objectives and results set forth in Section A. See also Section D5(a). 

The concept paper will be reviewed based on the following merit criteria. The criteria listed 
below are presented in order of importance – Factor 1 is the most important factor, and Factor 2 
is more important than Factor 3. 

(a) Factor 1 - Technical Approach 
Applicants will be evaluated on: 

● 
The extent to which the Applicant clearly articulates its innovative and feasible technical 
approach for each of the core areas set forth in section A and convincingly demonstrates 
the rationale of how it will achieve the desired objectives/results of the CABH Activity, 
including the indicators and proposed targets. 
● 
The extent to which the applicant demonstrates ability to leverage funds and engage 
with the private sector to help achieve the objectives. 
● 
The justification for geographies where their interventions will be conducted. 
● 
The extent to which the Applicant clearly demonstrates how it will engage with GOI 
ministries and agencies, state level agencies, the private sector and other relevant 
stakeholders, and how its approach will maintain the sustainability of the activity results. 
(b) Factor 2- Organizational Management and Staffing 
Applicants will be evaluated on the extent to which the Applicant’s well-articulated 
management plan and staffing plan demonstrates how the Applicant will effectively and 

30 | Page 


efficiently achieve the activity objectives and results.The applicant will also be evaluated based 
on clarity on roles and responsibilities of consortium members and skills of key personnel. 

(c) Factor 3 - Institutional Capability and Past Performance 
Applicants will be evaluated on the degree to which the Applicant convincingly demonstrates 
through its past experience that it possesses the institutional capacity to successfully implement 
the proposed intervention to achieve the project objectives and results. 

Institutional capacity and past performance records for both Applicant and its proposed 
consortium members will be closely reviewed and evaluated for their relevance and 
performance experience on similar projects performed within the last 3-5 years. Relevance is 
defined as projects performed of a similar scope, magnitude and scale. The Applicant and its 
partners have the technical and management experience and skills to implement the proposed 
interventions. 

Performance information will be used for responsibility determination. USAID may use 
performance information obtained from sources other than those identified by the Applicant. 
USAID will utilize existing databases of agreements performance information, if any, and 
solicit additional information from the references provided in and from other sources if and 
when the Agreement Officer finds the existing databases to be insufficient for evaluating an 
applicant’s performance. 

In cases where an Applicant lacks relevant past performance history or in which information on 
past performance is not available, the Applicant will not be evaluated favorably or unfavorably 
on past performance. In such cases the Applicant will be rated “neutral”. The “neutral” rating 
provided to these applicants is at the Agreement Officer's discretion based on the past 
performance ratings for all other applicants. Prior to assigning a "neutral" past performance 
rating, the Agreement Officer may take into account a broad range of information related to an 
applicant’s past performance. 

E.3 Phase 2 – Oral Presentation 
The applicant will be evaluated based on how effectively the applicant responds to the questions 
and clarifications raised by USAID on the technical approach, organizational management and 
staffing, the MEL approach - how MEL is aligned with the activity theory of change, how 
information and knowledge from learning and strategic collaboration will be utilized to inform 
programmatic adaptations and decision-making; and the level of ambition in establishing 
realistic and achievable indicators and targets to achieve the project objectives and results. 

E.4 Phase 3 – Co-Creation 
Only those who succeed from the Phase 2 Merit Review will be invited to join the co-creation 
phase which will result in the submission of Final Technical and Cost/Business 
Applications for final evaluation. USAID reserves the right to select another Applicant from 
the pool of Phase 2 merit review participants in case final agreement is not reached with the 

31 | Page 


initially selected Applicant reaching Phase 3. 

E.5 Final Technical Application/Program Description 
There will be no evaluation factors during Phase 3 (Co Creation Workshop) but the resulting 
Program Description on the basis of which ASA will submit the technical application will be 
incorporated into the resulting Cooperative Agreement. The technical application is the most 
important part of consideration in making the award decision. 

At this stage, USAID/India will evaluate the Final Technical Application of the ASA as 
“Acceptable” or “Unacceptable”. In the event that negotiations fail to improve the ASA’s final 
technical application/program description, the Agreement Officer may determine the application 
as “Unacceptable”. 

E.6 Cost/Business Review 
During the Co-creationWorkshop, USAID/India and the ASA will commence negotiation 
regarding the anticipated costs associated with implementing the Program Description. 
Following the Workshop, the ASA will finalize a Cost/Business Application based upon the 
discussions. 

The Cost/Business Application will be reviewed separately from the Technical Application. 
Although Cost/Business Application will not be rated, the Applicant should have a structure that 
will allow it to provide the greatest value (highest result) at a reasonable cost. 

The Agency will evaluate the cost/business application of the applicant(s) under consideration 
for an award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable 
in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E and to ensure that all 
compliance requirements have been satisfied and the Agreement Officer can make an 
affirmative determination of responsibility. 

Cost will be reviewed for general completeness, reasonableness, allowability and allocability. 
Cost realism is an assessment of the accuracy with the proposed costs and represents the most 
probable cost of performance within the Applicant’s technical and management approach. Cost 
realism review will be performed as part of the review process to: 

(i) verify the Applicant’s understanding of the activity objective; 
(ii) assess the degree to which the cost application reflects the approaches and/or risk 
assessments made in the technical application as well as the risk that the Applicant will 
provide the supplies or services for the offered cost; and 
(iii) assess the degree to which the cost included in the cost application accurately 
represents the work effort included in the technical application. 
The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a preaward 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 

32 | Page 


objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending 
on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the 
award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

END OF SECTION E 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

33 | Page 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

F.1 Federal Award Notices 
The notice of award will be provided electronically to the successful applicant’s point of contact 
listed in the application. Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful applicants 
pursuant to ADS 303.3.7.1.b. For the successful application, USAID may reach out to the 
applicant with clarifying questions and a request for a revised application by a specified date. 
USAID reserves the right to award without requesting clarifications or additional detail on an 
application. 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have 
been appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No 
costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully 
executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

Applicants are advised that costs incurred prior to receipt of either a fully executed Agreement 
(in electronic or print form) or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer are 
not allowable and therefore are ineligible for reimbursement under the Agreement. The 
Agreement Officer will also provide written notification electronically to the unsuccessful 
Applicants’ Points of Contact. Requests for additional information from unsuccessful Applicants 
will not be considered. 

F.2 Administrative & National Policy Requirements 
The resulting cooperative agreement will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. : 

For U.S. Non-governmental organizations 
● 
2 CFR 700 https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 
● 
2 CFR 200 https://ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 

● 
ADS 303maa, Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-governmental Organizations 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mab.pdf 

For Non-U.S. Non-governmental organizations 

● 
ADS 303mab, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mab.pdf 

For Public International Organizations (PIOs) 

● 
ADS 308mab, Standard Provisions for Cost-Type Awards to PIOs 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/308mab.pdf 

34 | Page 


USAID/India Office of Acquisition and Assistance (OAA) will administer this award. The AO 
will designate an AOR to review, concur and/or approve on items outlined in Substantial 
Involvement (Section B.3 of this NOFO). 

F.3 Reporting Requirements 
The Recipient will adhere to all reporting requirements listed below; further, US Nongovernmental 
organizations need to be in compliance with 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700 
(specifically 2 CFR 200.327-329). 

The Recipient will submit all reports by the due date for approval from the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR). The Recipient will consult with the AOR on the format and content 
prior to submission. In addition to the reports below, the AOR may request additional 
information to contribute to the internal USAID project reviews. 

F.4 Program Income 
If the successful applicant is a non-profit organization, any program income generated under the 
award will be added to USAID funding (and any cost-sharing that may be provided, if 
applicable), and used for program purposes. However, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.307 Program 
Income, if the successful Applicant is a for-profit or commercial organization, any program 
income generated under the award will be deducted from the U.S. Government share of this 
award to determine the amount of USAID funding. 

Program income will be subject to 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. NGOs or the standard provision 
entitled Program Income for non-U.S. NGOs. If the successful Applicant is/are a PIO, any 
program income generated under the award will be added to USAID funding (and any non-
USAID funding that may be provided) and used for program purposes. 

F.5 Environmental Compliance 
The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities 
are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards 
are adopted for all activities. 

1a) Respondent environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures 
are specified in the following paragraphs of this Notice of Funding Opportunity. 

1b) In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 

35 | Page 


1c) No activity funded under this award will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 
Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 
Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 
(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation.”) 

An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) will be prepared and approved during the co-
creation and selection of various components for this activity. Prior to award, USAID will 
approve the IEE and also make it publicly available in the USAIS’s environmental compliance 
database. The IEE will cover activities expected to be implemented under this award. The 
recipient shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be 
funded after the award. 

2a) As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Cognizant Technical Officer and Mission Environmental Officer 
or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities 
under this award to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation. 

2b) If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written 
USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

2c) Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

3) If the approved Regulation 216 documentation is (1) an IEE that contains one or more 
Negative Determinations with conditions and/or (2) an Environmental Assessment (EA), the 
recipient shall: 
3a) Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental 
mitigation and monitoring plan (EMMP) or a project mitigation and monitoring (M&M) plan, 
the recipient shall prepare an EMMP or M&M Plan describing how the recipient will, in 
specific terms, implement all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed project activities 
within the scope of the award. The EMMP or M&M Plan shall include monitoring the 
implementation of the conditions and their effectiveness. 

3b) Integrate a completed EMMP or M&M Plan into the initial work plan. 

3c) Integrate an EMMP or M&M Plan into subsequent Annual Work Plans, making any 
necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts to the 

36 | Page 


environment. 

4a) Cost and technical applications must reflect environmental compliance costs and 
approaches. 

4b) Recipient will be expected to comply with all conditions specified in the approved IEE 
and/or EA. 

4c) If an IEE, as developed, includes a Positive Determination for one or more activities, the 
recipient will be required to develop and submit an EA addressing these activities. 

5a) USAID anticipates that environmental compliance and achieving optimal development 
outcomes for the proposed activities will require environmental management expertise. 
Respondents to the NOFO should therefore include as part of their application their approach to 
achieving environmental compliance and management, to include: 

5b) The respondent’s approach to implementing an IEE or EA. 

5c) The respondent’s approach to providing necessary environmental management expertise, 
including examples of past experiences of environmental management of similar activities. 

5d) The respondent’s illustrative budget for implementing the environmental compliance 
activities. For the purposes of this solicitation, applicants should reflect illustrative costs for 
environmental compliance implementation and monitoring in their cost proposal. 

F.6 ADS 303.3.35.2 Covered Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Equipment or 
Services (Effective Date: 08/18/2020 
Effective August 13, 2020, a recipient may not procure covered telecommunication equipment 
or services for the implementation of their program using award funds. 2 CFR 200.216, 
applicable to US organizations, and the standard provision “Prohibition on Certain 
Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment” applicable to non-US 
NGOs, implement Section 889(b) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act 
(NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2019 (Pub. L. 115-232) that prohibits the use of award funds, 
including direct and indirect costs, cost share and program income, to procure covered 
telecommunication and video surveillance services or equipment. The statute covers certain 
telecommunications equipment and services produced or provided by Huawei Technologies 
Company or ZTE Corporation, Hytera Communications Corporation, Hangzhou Hikvision 
Digital Technology Company, or Dahua Technology Company (or any subsidiary or affiliate of 
such entities). 
Such covered telecommunication equipment or services must not be reimbursed to the recipient 
as a direct or indirect cost or accepted as part of cost share. Additionally, the recipient must not 
use any program income generated under the award to purchase covered telecommunication 
equipment or services. 

37 | Page 


F.7 Procurement of “Covered Material” 
1. Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, and notwithstanding anything in this [award or 
contract] to the contrary, no funds under this [award or contract] may be used for the 
procurement of “Covered Material” as listed below without the prior written consent of the 
[Contracting/Agreement] Officer. For purposes of this [provision or special contract 
requirement], “Covered Material” shall consist of the following: 
● 
Surgical N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators, including devices that are 
disposable half-face-piece non-powered air-purifying particulate respirators intended 
for use to cover the nose and mouth of the wearer to help reduce wearer exposure to 
pathogenic biological airborne particulates; 
● 
PPE surgical masks, including masks that cover the user’s nose and mouth and 
provide a physical barrier to fluids and particulate materials; 
● 
PPE nitrile gloves, including those defined at 21 CFR 880.6250 (exam gloves) 
and 878.4460 (surgical gloves) and such nitrile gloves intended for the same 
purposes; and 
● 
Level 3 and 4 Surgical Gowns and Surgical Isolation Gowns that meet all of the 
requirements in ANSI/AAMI PB70 and ASTM F2407-06 and are classified by 
Surgical Gown Barrier Performance based on AAMI PB70. 
For clarity, non-medical grade masks, including cloth masks, are not included in the list of 
Covered Material above. Further, USAID may modify the list of Covered Material from time-
to-time, in writing; any such changes to the list shall apply prospectively. 

2. The restrictions set forth in paragraph 1 above shall not apply to the procurement of Covered 
Material: 
(a) for the protection of and use by the [recipient’s or contractor’s] or sub-[recipient’s or 
contractor’s] staff; or 
(b) for the safe and effective continuity of USAID-funded programs, including for the 
protection of beneficiaries, provided that such items are manufactured locally or in the 
same geographical region as the country in which USAID is providing assistance, as 
defined by the U.S. Department of State’s regional system (Africa, East Asia and the 
Pacific, Europe and Eurasia, Near East, South and Central Asia, and Western 
Hemisphere), and provided that such items are not, and could not reasonably be 
expected to be, meant for the United States market. 
The AO may change the exemptions set forth in this paragraph in writing; any such changes 
shall apply prospectively. 

38 | Page 


3. “Staff” for the purposes of the Exception in 2(a) is defined as any individuals receiving 
financial compensation from the recipient or contractor or sub-recipient or subcontractor. 
4. For each purchase of Covered Material under Exception 2(b), the recipient or contractor 
must provide the AO/CO with contemporaneously dated documentation that the order of 
Covered Material is not meant for, and could not reasonably be meant for, the U.S. market. The 
AO/CO will then upload the statement into ASIST. This documentation can take the form of a 
simple email verification from a vendor or a brief, contemporaneously dated, written statement 
or e-mail from the recipient or contractor confirming its conversation with the vendor. 
F.8 Program Reporting 
The Recipient must submit a copy of each report required by this Agreement to the Agreement 
Officer, the AOR, and the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). Submission to the 
DEC must be through the public-facing and searchable DEC Website (http://dec.usaid.gov). 

The title page of all reports forwarded to USAID must include a descriptive title, the author's 
name, Cooperative Agreement number, the project number and title, the Recipient’s name, the 
name of the USAID office, and the publication or issuance date of the report. 

(1) Annual Implementation Plan 
The Recipient must work with USAID to develop and submit an initial annual implementation 
work plan within 45 calendar days of the effective date of the award. Subsequent annual 
implementation plans will be submitted within 30 days before the start of the succeeding fiscal 
year. The AOR will review and approve the plan within 15 calendar days after receipt of the 
draft implementation plan. 

The implementation plan must include, at a minimum: 

● 
Proposed accomplishments and expected progress towards achieving program results and 
performance measures tied to the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 
● 
Timeline for implementation of the year’s proposed interventions, including target 
completion dates 
● 
Information on how interventions will be put in place 
● 
Gender Action Plan that will define how gender will be integrated in the activity cycle 
● 
Environmental Risk Mitigation Plan which will describe how environmental compliance 
and climate risk management will be integrated into activity interventions 
● 
Personnel requirements to achieve expected outcomes 
● 
Details of collaboration with other major partners 
● 
Annual budget with estimates of projected monthly expenditures 
(2) Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 
The MEL Plan must describe the agreed upon framework of goals, outcomes, and outputs for 
the program, along with performance indicators, baselines and targets defined for each, and sex


39 | Page 


disaggregated where appropriate. The MEL Plan must describe the evaluative work that the 
implementing partner will conduct for its own management decision-making, institutional 
learning, and accountability purposes (see ADS 203.3.1, as revised, for more detailed guidance). 

During the first sixty (60) days after the award is made, the Recipient will work closely with the 
USAID AOR to finalize its MEL Plan. The plan must identify specific indicators for measuring 
the following aspects of the recipient’s performance: 

● 
progress toward meeting program objectives and sub-objectives; 
● 
time frame for achieving these objectives and sub-objectives; 
The Recipient will collaborate with the USAID AOR to review/update its MEL Plan, and to 
monitor and report to USAID. 

Both quantitative and qualitative indicators need to be developed and special attention paid to 
data sources, collection methods, and data quality assessment. 

Program monitoring and evaluation comprises an essential component of this cooperative 
agreement for the following reasons: 

● 
informs USAID of progress; 
● 
enables detailed and on-going design of activities and sub-activities; 
● 
builds counterparts’ capacity to collect and analyze the data for sound decision-making; 
and 
At a minimum, the MEL Plan must include the following: 

▪ 
Automated and other methods used to gather, store, manipulate, summarize, analyze, 
and/or report performance data. 
▪ 
Procedures for regular communication with USAID regarding the status of monitoring 
activities, including a means for early notification of problems. 
▪ 
Means of addressing a discovered lack of progress or success. Procedures will focus on 
learning from mistakes, analyzing them, and ascertaining the reason for missteps. 
▪ 
A learning and research agenda and how this agenda will help achieve activity level 
results and contribute to national and international knowledge and learning. 
▪ 
Information about all activities to be monitored under the MEL Plan. The list of activities 
must be provided in a logical framework which: 
▪ 
Links activities to Agreement results—both those dictated by USAID in the program 
description and lower level or complementary results contained in the Recipient’s 
approach. 
▪ 
Describes assumptions being made about the relationship of the activity to the Agreement 
result. 
▪ 
Identifies the indicators against which progress is to be measured. Includes methods to be 
used for monitoring 
40 | Page 


▪ 
Provides an illustrative schedule for discrete monitoring activities tied to the overall 
program implementation plan. 
● 
Gender Consideration: 
To the greatest extent possible, the Recipient should seek to include both men and women in all 
aspects of this program including participation and leadership in e.g., meetings, training, etc. 
The Recipient must collect, analyze and submit to USAID sex-disaggregated data and proposed 
actions that will address any identified gender-related issues. 

In order to ensure that USAID assistance makes the maximum optimal contribution to gender 
equality, performance management systems and evaluations must include gender-sensitive 
indicators and sex-disaggregated data when the technical analyses supporting the Agreement 
demonstrates that: 

▪ 
The different roles and status of women and men affect the activities to be undertaken; and 
▪ 
The anticipated results of the work would affect women and men differently. 
(3) Quarterly Performance Reports 
The Recipient will submit quarterly reports that give insight into the progress of planned 
activities. Such reports follow USAID fiscal quarters, i.e., Quarter 1 covers October-
December; Quarter 2 covers January-March; Quarter 3 covers April-June; Quarter 4 covers 
July-September. The quarterly report is due within 30 days after the fiscal quarter’s end. In lieu 
of the fourth quarter report, the Recipient will submit an Annual Progress Report (see Section 
F.4(4)4 below). 

The narrative report will include qualitative and quantitative information describing activities 

carried out and specific results achieved during the quarter. In addition, the narrative report 

will indicate key implementation challenges encountered and how they were, or are planned to 

be, resolved. To the extent where MEL Plan includes quarterly targets, this should be reflected 

in the narrative report. 

(4) Annual Progress Reports 
The Recipient must submit an annual progress report within 30 days after the end of the fiscal 
year to cover annual performance from the fiscal year. At a minimum, both quarterly and annual 
progress reports will contain: 

● 
Progress (interventions completed, benchmarks achieved, and performance 
standards completed) made since the last report by region and province as 
applicable 
● 
Problems encountered and whether they were solved or are still outstanding 
● 
Proposed solutions to new or ongoing problems 
● 
Success stories 
● 
Security concerns 
● 
Information on new opportunities for program expansion 
41 | Page 


● 
Qualitative data on program achievement and results 
● 
Updated/filled MEL Plan, as an attachment 
● 
Documentation of the best practices that can be taken to scale 
● 
Progress to date on sustainability, gender and environmental mitigation plans 
● 
Update on monthly expenditures for the quarter vis-à-vis annual budget 
(5) Financial Reporting: 
(a) Quarterly Financial Report 
The Recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) quarterly, no later than 30 days 
after the end of the quarter to the Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and the Controller. 

Electronic copies of SF-425 and instructions for using it can be found at: 

http://www.forms.gov/bgfPortal/docDetails.do?dId=15149 

(b) Final Financial Report 
Within 90 days following the estimated completion date of this award, the Recipient must 
submit to the: (a) USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMP-LOC Unit; (b) Agreement Officer 
(indirco@usaid.gov ); (c) Controller (indiarfmo@usaid.gov ); and (c) Agreement 
Officer Representative (AOR). 

(c) Foreign Tax Reports 
Reporting of foreign taxes under this agreement shall follow the standard provision entitled 
“Reporting Host Government Taxes” in this award. 

 Host government taxes are not allowable where the Agreement Officer provides the necessary 
means to the recipient to obtain an exemption or refund of such taxes, and the recipient fails to 
take reasonable steps to obtain such exemption or refund. Otherwise, taxes are allowable in 
accordance with the Standard Provision, “Applicability of 2 CFR 200 and 2 CFR 700,” and 
must be reported as required in this provision. 

The Recipient must include this reporting requirement in all applicable sub-agreements, 
including subawards and contracts. 

(6) Close-out Plan 
No later than six (6) months prior to the completion date of the agreement, the Recipient will 
submit a close-out plan for the Agreement Officer (AO) approval. The close-out plan shall 

include: 

● 
Draft property disposition plan 
● 
Plan for the phase-out of in-country operations 
● 
Delivery schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the 
agreement 
42 | Page 


● 
Timetable for completing all required actions in the close-out plan, including 
submission date of the final property disposition plan to the AO. 
(7) Final Report 
The Recipient must submit, within ninety (90) days following the expiration of this cooperative 
agreement, a detailed final report. The final report will cover the entire period of the award and 
will include, but is not limited to: 

(i) executive summary; 
(ii) overall description of the activities and methods of assistance used under the Program 
during the period of this Cooperative Agreement, and the significance of these activities; 
(iii) brief description of the cumulative results towards achieving the program objectives and the 
performance indicators, as well as an analysis of how the indicators illustrate the program’s 
impact on the accomplishment of the program’s overall objectives; 
(iv) an assessment of impact of the program in assisting USAID in meeting targets, as well as 
any unmet targets and the reasons for them; 
(v) section reporting on gender, sustainability and institutionalization, environmental 
compliance and climate risk mitigation; 
(v) success stories; 
(vi) discussion on the issues and problems that emerged during program implementation and 
how they were overcome; 
(vii) cost-effectiveness; 
(viii) lessons learned; and 
(ix) recommendations for USAID’s future interventions. 
The final/completion report shall also contain an index of all reports and information products 
produced under this agreement. 

F.9 Branding & Marking 
It is a federal statutory and regulatory requirement that all USAID programs, projects, activities, 
public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funded under a USAID 
grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award or sub-award, must be marked 
appropriately overseas with the USAID identity. See Section 641, Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended and 2 CFR 700.16. 

Under the regulation, USAID requires the submission of a Branding Strategy and a Marking 
Plan by the Apparently Successful Applicant, as defined in the regulation. A Branding 
Implementation Strategy and Marking Plan must be in accordance with USAID Branding and 
Marking Plan as required per ADS 320 at the following link: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/320.pdf 

The Branding and Marking Plan may include a request for a waiver or exceptions to marking 
requirements established in 2 CFR 700.16. The Agreement Officer is responsible for evaluating 
and approving the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan (including any request for exceptions 

43 | Page 


and waiver) of the ASA, consistent with the provisions ”Branding Strategy”, “Marking Plan”, 
and “Marking of USAID-funded Assistance Awards” contained in AAPD 05-11 and in 2 CFR 

700.16. Please note that in contrast to “exception” to marking requirements, waivers based on 
circumstances in the host country must be approved by the Mission Director or other USAID 
Principal Officers, see 1 CFR 700.16(j). 
END OF SECTION F 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

44 | Page 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

G.1 AGENCY POINT OF CONTACT(POC) FOR QUESTIONS 
Agency Point of Contact 

Name: Armando Espinosa 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email: aespinosa@usaid.gov 

Above is the Points of contact (POC) for questions while the funding opportunity is open. 

All prospective Applicants must send their questions in writing by the due date and time 
specified on the cover page of this NOFO in order to allow a reply to reach all prospective 
Applicants before the submission of their Initial Application. Oral explanations or instructions 
given before award will not be binding. Any information given to a prospective Applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an 
amendment of this NOFO if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if lack 
of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicants. 

END OF SECTION G

 THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

45 | Page 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

ATTACHMENTS: 

1. Annex 1: Certifications, Assurances, Other Statement of the Recipient and Solicitations 
Standard Provisions 
2. Annex 2: Past Performance Questionnaire 
3. Annex 3: Preliminary Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Analysis 
END OF SECTION H

 THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY. 

46 | Page 


ANNEX 1: CERTIFICATIONS, ASSURANCES, OTHER STATEMENTS OF THE 
RECIPIENT AND SOLICITATIONS STANDARD PROVISIONS 

The following certifications are required for full application submissions in Phase 3. 

Certification, Assurances, Other Statements of the Recipient and Solicitation Standard Provisions 
can be at website http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
Part I – Certifications and Assurances 
Part II – Key Individual Certification Narcotics Offenses and Drug Trafficking 
Part III – Participant Certification Narcotics Offenses and Drug Trafficking 
Part IV – Representation by Organization Regarding a Delinquent Tax or a Felony 

Criminal Conviction 
Part V – Other Statements of Recipient 
Part VI – Standard Provisions for Solicitations 

CERTIFICATIONS, ASSURANCES, OTHER STATEMENTS OF THE RECIPIENT 
AND SOLICITATIONS STANDARD PROVISIONS 

NOTE: When these Certifications, Assurances, and other Statements of Recipient are used for 
cooperative agreements, the term 'Grant' means 'Cooperative Agreement'

 1. Assurance of Compliance with Laws and Regulations Governing NonDiscrimination 
in Federally Assisted Programs 
Note: This certification applies to Non-U.S. organizations if any part of the program will 
be undertaken in the United States. 

(a) The recipient hereby assures that no person in the United States will, on the bases set forth 
below, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected 
to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving financial assistance from USAID, 
and that with respect to the Cooperative Agreement for which application is being made, it 
will comply with the requirements of: 
47 | Page 


(1) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Pub. L. 88-352, 42 U.S.C. 2000-d), which 
prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin, in programs and activities 
receiving Federal financial assistance; 
(2) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), which prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of handicap in programs and activities receiving Federal 
financial assistance; 
(3) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended (Pub. L. 95-478), which prohibits 
discrimination based on age in the delivery of services and benefits supported with 
Federal funds; 
(4) Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681, et seq.), which 
prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs and activities receiving 
Federal financial assistance (whether or not the programs or activities are offered or 
sponsored by an educational institution); and 
(5) USAID regulations implementing the above nondiscrimination laws, set forth in Chapter 
II of Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(b) If the recipient is an institution of higher education, the Assurances given herein extend to 
admission practices and to all other practices relating to the treatment of students or clients of 
the institution, or relating to the opportunity to participate in the provision of services or other 
benefits to such individuals, and must be applicable to the entire institution unless the recipient 
establishes to the satisfaction of the USAID Administrator that the institution's practices in 
designated parts or programs of the institution will in no way affect its practices in the program 
of the institution for which financial assistance is sought, or the beneficiaries of, or participants 
in, such programs. 
2. Certification Regarding Lobbying 
The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that: 

(1) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the 
undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of 
any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a 
Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the making of 
any Federal Cooperative Agreement, the making of any Federal loan, the entering into of any 
cooperative agreement, and the extension, continuation, renewal, amendment or modification 
of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement. 
48 | Page 


(2) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to 
any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any 
agency, a member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a 
Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative 
agreement, the undersigned must complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure of 
Lobbying Activities,” in accordance with its instructions. 
(3) The undersigned must require that the language of this certification be included in the 
award documents for all subawards at all tiers (including contracts, subawards, and contracts 
under grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients must certify and 
disclose accordingly. 
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this 
transaction was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for 
making or entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, United States Code. 
Any person who fails to file the required certification will be subject to a civil penalty of not 
less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure. 

3. Statement for Loan Guarantees and Loan Insurance 
“The undersigned states, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that: If any funds 

have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an 

officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of 

Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this commitment 

providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, the undersigned must complete 

and submit Standard Form-LLL, “Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,” in accordance with 

its instructions. 

Submission of this statement is a prerequisite for making or entering into this transaction 

imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. Code. Any person who fails to file the required 

statement will be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than 

$100,000 for each such failure.” 

4. Prohibition on Assistance to Drug Traffickers for Covered Countries and Individuals 
(ADS 206) 
USAID reserves the right to terminate this Agreement, to demand a refund or take other 
appropriate measures if the Grantee is found to have been convicted of a narcotics offense or 
to have been engaged in drug trafficking as defined in 22 CFR Part 140. The undersigned 
must review USAID ADS 206 to determine if any certifications are required for Key 
Individuals or Covered Participants. 
If there are COVERED PARTICIPANTS: USAID reserves the right to terminate assistance to 
or take other appropriate measures with respect to, any participant approved by USAID who is 

49 | Page 


found to have been convicted of a narcotics offense or to have been engaged in drug 
trafficking as defined in 22 CFR Part 140. 

5. Certification Regarding Terrorist Financing, Implementing Executive Order 13224 
By signing and submitting this application, the prospective recipient provides the certification 
set out below: 

1. The Recipient, to the best of its current knowledge, did not provide, within the 
previous ten years, and will take all reasonable steps to ensure that it does not and will not 
knowingly provide, material support or resources to any individual or entity that commits, 
attempts to commit, advocates, facilitates, or participates in terrorist acts, or has 
committed, attempted to commit, facilitated, or participated in terrorist acts, as that term is 
defined in paragraph 3. The certification in the preceding sentence will not be deemed 
applicable to material support or resources provided by the Recipient pursuant to an 
authorization contained in one or more applicable licenses issued by the U.S. Treasury’s 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). 
2. The following steps may enable the Recipient to comply with its obligations 
under paragraph 1: 
a. Before providing any material support or resources to an individual or entity, the Recipient 
will verify that the individual or entity does not (i) appear on the master list of Specially 
Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons, which is maintained by OFAC, or (ii) is not 
included in any supplementary information concerning prohibited individuals or entities that 
may be provided by USAID to the Recipient. 
b. Before providing any material support or resources to an individual or entity, the Recipient 
also will verify that the individual or entity has not been designated by the United Nations 
Security (UNSC) sanctions committee established under UNSC Resolution 1267 (1999) (the 
“1267 Committee”) [individuals and entities linked to the Taliban, Usama bin Laden, or the 
Al- Qaida Organization]. To determine whether there has been a published designation of an 
individual or entity by the 1267 Committee, the Recipient should refer to the consolidated list 
available online at the Committee’s Web site: 
http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1267/1267ListEng.htm. 

c. Before providing any material support or resources to an individual or entity, the 
Recipient will consider all information about that individual or entity of which it is aware 
and all public information that is reasonably available to it or of which it should be aware. 
d. The Recipient also will implement reasonable monitoring and oversight procedures 
to safeguard against assistance being diverted to support terrorist activity. 
50 | Page 


3. For purposes of this Certification – 
a. “Material support and resources” means currency or monetary instruments or financial 
securities, financial services, lodging, training, expert advice or assistance, safehouses, false 
documentation or identification, communications equipment, facilities, weapons, lethal 
substances, explosives, personnel, transportation, and other physical assets, except medicine 
or religious materials.” 
(i) “Training" means instruction or teaching designed to impart a 
specific skill, as opposed to general knowledge. 
(ii) “Expert advice or assistance" means advice or assistance derived 
from scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge. 
b. “Terrorist act” means -
(i) an act prohibited pursuant to one of the 12 United Nations 
Conventions and Protocols related to terrorism (see UN terrorism conventions 
Internet site: http://untreaty.un.org/English/Terrorism.asp); or 
(ii) an act of premeditated, politically motivated violence 
perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or 
clandestine agents; or 
(iii) any other act intended to cause death or serious bodily injury to a 
civilian, or to any other person not taking an active part in hostilities in a situation 
of armed conflict, when the purpose of such act, by its nature or context, is to 
intimidate a population, or to compel a government or an international organization 
to do or to abstain from doing any act. 
c. “Entity” means a partnership, association, corporation, or other organization, 
group or subgroup. 
d. References in this Certification to the provision of material support and resources must not 
be deemed to include the furnishing of USAID funds or USAID-financed commodities to the 
ultimate beneficiaries of USAID assistance, such as recipients of food, medical care, micro- 
enterprise loans, shelter, etc., unless the Recipient has reason to believe that one or more of 
these beneficiaries commits, attempts to commit, advocates, facilitates, or participates in 
terrorist acts, or has committed, attempted to commit, facilitated or participated in terrorist acts. 
e. The Recipient’s obligations under paragraph 1 are not applicable to the procurement of 
goods and/or services by the Recipient that are acquired in the ordinary course of business 
51 | Page 


through contract or purchase, e.g., utilities, rents, office supplies, gasoline, etc., unless the 
Recipient has reason to believe that a vendor or supplier of such goods and services commits, 
attempts to commit, advocates, facilitates, or participates in terrorist acts, or has committed, 
attempted to commit, facilitated or participated in terrorist acts. 

This Certification is an express term and condition of any agreement issued as a result of this 
application, and any violation of it will be grounds for unilateral termination of the agreement 
by USAID prior to the end of its term. 

6. Certification Regarding Trafficking in Persons, Implementing Title XVII of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013 
Note: This certification must be completed prior to receiving an award if the estimated value 
of services required to be performed under the award outside the United States exceeds 
$500,000. This certification must also be submitted annually to the Agreement Officer during 
the term of the award. 

By signing below, the applicant or recipient, as applicable, through its duly designated 
representative, after having conducted due diligence, hereby certifies the following: 

1. The application/recipient has implemented procedures to prevent any activities described 
in section (a) of the Mandatory Provision “Trafficking in Persons” and to monitor, detect, and 
terminate any contractor, subawardee, employee, or other agent of the applicant/recipient 
engaging in any activities described in such section; and 
2. To the best of the representative’s knowledge, neither the applicant/recipient, nor 
any employee, contractor, or subawardee of the applicant/recipient, nor any agent of the 
applicant/recipient or of such a contractor or subawardee, is engaged in any of the activities 
described in section (a) the Mandatory Provision “Trafficking in Persons.” 
7. Certification of Recipient 
By signing below the recipient provides certifications and assurances for (1) the Assurance 

of Compliance with Laws and Regulations Governing NonDiscrimination in Federally 

Assisted Programs, (2) the Certification Regarding Lobbying, (3) the Prohibition on 

Assistance to Drug Traffickers for Covered Countries and Individuals (ADS 206), (4) the 

Certification Regarding Terrorist Financing Implementing Executive Order 13224, and (5) 

the Certification Regarding Trafficking in Persons above. 

These certifications and assurances are given in consideration of and for the purpose of 

obtaining any and all Federal grants, loans, contracts, property, discounts, or other Federal 

financial assistance extended after the date hereof to the recipient by the Agency, including 

52 | Page 


installment payments after such date on account of applications for Federal financial 
assistance that was approved before such date. The recipient recognizes and agrees that such 
Federal financial assistance will be extended in reliance on the representations and agreements 
made in these assurances, and that the United States will have the right to seek judicial 
enforcement of these assurances. These assurances are binding on the recipient, its successors, 
transferees, and assignees, and the person or persons whose signatures appear below are 
authorized to sign these assurances on behalf of the recipient. 

Request for Application or Annual Program Statement No. 

Application No. 
Date of Application 
Name of Recipient 
Typed Name and Title 

Signature 

Date 

53 | Page 


Part II – Key Individual Certification Narcotics Offenses and Drug Trafficking 

I hereby certify that within the last ten years: 

1. I have not been convicted of a violation of, or a conspiracy to violate, any law or regulation 
of the United States or any other country concerning narcotic or psychotropic drugs or other 
controlled substances. 
2. I am not and have not been an illicit trafficker in any such drug or controlled substance. 
3. I am not and have not been a knowing assistor, abettor, conspirator, or colluder with others 
in the illicit trafficking in any such drug or substance. 
Signature: 
Date: 
Name: 
Title/Position: 
Organization: 
Address: 
Date of Birth: 

NOTICE: 

1. You are required to sign this Certification under the provisions of 22 CFR Part 140, 
Prohibition on Assistance to Drug Traffickers. These regulations were issued by the 
Department of State and require that certain key individuals of organizations must sign this 
Certification. 
2. If you make a false Certification you are subject to U.S. criminal prosecution under 18 
U.S.C. 1001. 
54 | Page 


Part III – Participant Certification Narcotics Offenses and Drug Trafficking 

1. I hereby certify that within the last ten years: 
a. I have not been convicted of a violation of, or a conspiracy to violate, any law or regulation 
of the United States or any other country concerning narcotic or psychotropic drugs or other 
controlled substances. 
b. I am not and have not been an illicit trafficker in any such drug or controlled substance. 
c. I am not or have not been a knowing assistor, abettor, conspirator, or colluder with others 
in the illicit trafficking in any such drug or substance. 
2. I understand that USAID may terminate my training if it is determined that I engaged in 
the above conduct during the last ten years or during my USAID training. 
Signature: 

Name: 

Date: 

Address: 
Date of Birth: 

NOTICE: 

1. You are required to sign this Certification under the provisions of 22 CFR Part 140, 
Prohibition on Assistance to Drug Traffickers. These regulations were issued by the 
Department of State and require that certain participants must sign this Certification. 
2. If you make a false Certification you are subject to U.S. criminal prosecution under 18 
U.S.C. 1001. 
55 | Page 


Part IV – Representation by Organization Regarding a Delinquent Tax Liability or a 
Felony Criminal Conviction 

(a) As required by sections 744 and 745 of Division E of the Consolidated and Further 
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235), and similar provisions, if contained 
in subsequent appropriations acts, none of the funds made available by that Act may be used 
to enter into an assistance award with any organization that – 
(1) “Was convicted of a felony criminal violation under any Federal law within the preceding 
24 months, where the awarding agency has direct knowledge of the conviction, unless the 
agency has considered, in accordance with its procedures, that this further action is not 
necessary to protect the interests of the Government”; or 
(2) “Has any unpaid Federal tax liability that has been assessed for which all judicial and 
administrative remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed, and that is not being paid in a 
timely manner pursuant to an agreement with the authority responsible for collecting the tax 
liability, where the awarding agency has direct knowledge of the unpaid tax liability, unless 
the Federal agency has considered, in accordance with its procedures, that this further action 
is not necessary to protect the interests of the Government”. 
It is USAID’s policy that no award may be made to any organization covered by (1) or (2) 
above, unless the M/OAA Compliance Division has made a determination that suspension 
or debarment is not necessary to protect the interests of the Government. 

(b) Applicant Representation: 
(1) The Applicant represents that it is [ ] is not [ ] an organization that was convicted of a 
felony criminal violation under a Federal law within the preceding 24 months. 
(2) The Applicant represents that it is [ ] is not [ ] an organization that has any unpaid Federal 
tax liability that has been assessed for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been 
exhausted or have lapsed, and that is not being paid in a timely manner pursuant to an 
agreement with the authority responsible for collecting the tax liability. 
56 | Page 


Part V – Other Statements of Recipient 

1. Authorized Individuals 
The recipient represents that the following persons are authorized to negotiate on its behalf 
with the Government and to bind the recipient in connection with this application or grant: 
Name Title: 
Telephone No. 
Facsimile No. 

2. Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) 
If the recipient is a U.S. organization, or a foreign organization which has income 
effectively connected with the conduct of activities in the U.S. or has an office or a place 
of business or a fiscal paying agent in the U.S., please indicate the recipient’s TIN: 

TIN: 

3. Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number 
(a) Unless otherwise specified in the solicitation using an applicable exemption, in the space 
provided at the end of this provision, the recipient should supply the Data Universal 
Numbering System (DUNS) number applicable to that name and address. Recipients should 
take care to report the number that identifies the recipient's name and address exactly as stated 
in the proposal. 
(b) The DUNS is a 9-digit number assigned by Dun and Bradstreet Information Services. If 
the recipient does not have a DUNS number, the recipient should call Dun and Bradstreet 
directly at 1-800-333-0505. A DUNS number will be provided immediately by telephone at no 
charge to the recipient. The recipient should be prepared to provide the following information: 
(1) Recipient’s name. 
(2) Recipient’s address. 
(3) Recipient's telephone number. 
57 | Page 


(4) Line of business. 
(5) Chief executive officer/key manager. 
(6) Date the organization was started. 
(7) Number of people employed by the recipient. 
(8) Company affiliation. 
(c) Recipients located outside the United States may email Dun and Bradstreet at 
globalinfo@dbisma.com to obtain the location and phone number of the local Dun 
and Bradstreet Information Services office. 
The DUNS system is distinct from the Federal Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) 

system. DUNS: 

4. Letter of Credit (LOC) Number 
If the recipient has an existing Letter of Credit (LOC) with USAID, please indicate the 
LOC number: 
LOC: 

5. Procurement Information 
(a) Applicability. This applies to the procurement of goods and services planned by the 
recipient (i.e., contracts, purchase orders, etc.) from a supplier of goods or services for the 
direct use or benefit of the recipient in conducting the program supported by the grant, and not 
to assistance provided by the recipient (i.e., a subgrant or subagreement) to a subgrantee or 
subrecipient in support of the subgrantee’s or subrecipient's program. Provision by the recipient 
of the requested information does not, in and of itself, constitute USAID approval. 
(b) Amount of Procurement. Please indicate the total estimated dollar amount of goods 
and services which the recipient plans to purchase under the grant: 
$ ______________________ 

(c) Nonexpendable Property. If the recipient plans to purchase nonexpendable equipment 
which would require the approval of the Agreement Officer, indicate below (using a continuation 
page, as necessary) the types, quantities of each, and estimated unit costs. Nonexpendable 
equipment for which the Agreement Officer's approval to purchase is required is any article of 
58 | Page 


nonexpendable tangible personal property charged directly to the grant, having a useful life of 
more than one year and an acquisition cost of $5,000 or more per unit. 

TYPE/DESCRIPTION (Generic) _______________ 

QUANTITY _______________________________ 

ESTIMATED UNIT COST ____________ 

(d) Source If the recipient plans to purchase any goods/commodities which are not in 
accordance with the Standard Provision “USAID Eligibility Rules for Procurement of 
Commodities and Services,” indicate below (using a continuation page, as necessary) the 
types and quantities of each, estimated unit costs of each, and probable source. “Source” 
means the country from which a commodity is shipped to the cooperating country or the 
cooperating country itself if the commodity is located in the cooperating country at the time of 
purchase. However, where a commodity is shipped from a free port or bonded warehouse in 
the form in which received, “source” means the country from which the commodity was 
shipped to the free port or bonded warehouse. Additionally, “available for purchase” includes 
“offered for sale at the time of purchase” if the commodity is listed in a vendor’s catalog or 
other statement of inventory, kept as part of the vendor’s customary business practices and 
regularly offered for sale, even if the commodities are not physically on the vendors’ shelves 
or even in the source country at the time of the order. In such cases, the recipient must 
document that the commodity was listed in the vendor’s catalog or other statement of 
inventory; that the vendor has a regular and customary business practice of selling the 
commodity through “just in time” or other similar inventory practices; and the recipient did 
not engage the vendor to list the commodity in its catalog or other statement of inventory just 
to fulfill the recipient’s request for the commodity. 
TYPE/DESCRIPTION __________

QUANTITY __________________ 

ESTIMATED GOODS ___________________ 

PROBABLE GOODS _____________________ 

PROBABLE (Generic) __________________ 

UNIT COST _________________________ 

SOURCE ___________________ 

(e) Restricted Goods. If the recipient plans to purchase any restricted goods, indicate below 
(using a continuation page, as necessary) the types and quantities of each, estimated unit costs 
of each, intended use, and probable source. Restricted goods are Agricultural Commodities, 
59 | Page 


Motor Vehicles, Pharmaceuticals, Pesticides, Used Equipment, U.S. Government-Owned 
Excess Property, and Fertilizer. 

TYPE/DESCRIPTION ______________

QUANTITY ___________________ 
ESTIMATED _______________ 
PROBABLE 

INTENDED USE (Generic) ________________ 
UNIT COST _____________________ 
SOURCE ______________________ 

(f) Supplier Nationality. If the recipient plans to purchase any goods or services from 
suppliers of goods and services whose nationality is not in accordance with the Standard 
Provision “USAID Eligibility Rules for Procurement of Commodities and Services,” indicate 
below (using a continuation page, as necessary) the types and quantities of each good or 
service, estimated costs of each, probable nationality of each non-U.S. supplier of each good 
or service, and the rationale for purchasing from a non-U.S. supplier. 
TYPE/DESCRIPTION _____________
QUANTITY _______________ 
ESTIMATED ___________
PROBABLE SUPPLIER _______________ 
NATIONALITY _______________ 
RATIONALE (Generic) ________ 
UNIT COST (Non-US Only) _____________ 
FOR NON-US ________________ 

6. Past Performance References 
On a continuation page, please provide past performance information requested in the RFA. 

7. Type of Organization 
The recipient, by checking the applicable box, represents that - 

(a) If the recipient is a U.S. entity, it operates as [ ] a corporation incorporated under the laws 
of the State of, [ ] an individual, [ ] a partnership, [ ] a nongovernmental nonprofit organization, 
[ ] a state or local governmental organization, [ ] a private college or university, [ ] a public 
college or university, [ ] an international organization, or [ ] a joint venture; or 
60 | Page 


(b) If the recipient is a non-U.S. entity, it operates as [ ] a corporation organized under the 
laws of _____ (country), [ ] an individual, [ ] a partnership, [ ] a nongovernmental 
nonprofit organization, [ ] a nongovernmental educational institution, [ ] a governmental 
organization, [ ] an international organization, or [ ] a joint venture. 
8. Estimated Costs of Communications Products 
The following are the estimate(s) of the cost of each separate communications product (i.e., 
any printed material [other than non-color photocopy material], photographic services, or 
video production services) which is anticipated under the grant. Each estimate must include 
all the costs associated with preparation and execution of the product. Use a continuation page 
as necessary. 

61 | Page 


Part VI – Standard Provisions for Solicitations 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 
a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a 
"Branding Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, 
and how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 
b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in 
the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation 
with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the 
grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 
e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 
(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 
(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID logo 
and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the USAID Web site 
at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section F of the RFA or APS states that the USAID 
Administrator has approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 
62 | Page 


(iii) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the program or 
project. 
(iv) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that competes 
with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to consistently identify 
this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section F of the RFA or 
APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or 
tagline. 
(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 
(i) Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service announcements, 
billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 
country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so forth. 
Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the 
American People.” 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support 
this project or program. 
(5) Information on any direct involvement from the host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 
(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and 
if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 
e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information 
is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's 
cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 
f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 
63 | Page 


(END OF PROVISION)

 2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 
a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other 
items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and 
brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official 
marking for the Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. 
Section F of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers 
no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the 
grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 
(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure projects 
or other sites physical in nature; 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio-visual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, 
media, or communications products funded by USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 
64 | Page 


(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, 
fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot 
be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of 
the American people. 
(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 
(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the 
program deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 
and where the applicant will place the marking; 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity , and 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 
(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation 
of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 
(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The applicant 
must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program goal furthered 
by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. 
Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for which an exemption is 
sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must explain why each 
particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each particular 
item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or product. 
65 | Page 


(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 
or commodity would impair its functionality. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would 
not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must 
identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or otherwise be 
inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international 
law violated by the marking. 
f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and 
will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to 
ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of 
the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 
g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative 
agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 
(END OF PROVISION) 

[END OF ANNEX I] 

66 | Page 


ANNEX 2: PAST PERFORMANCE QUESTIONNAIRE 

On the following pages, summarize the Applicant’s performance in each rating factor listed 
below. Each factor has a set of sub factors with four possible adjectival ratings. Determine the 
adjectival rating that most nearly represents your experience with this applicant and indicate your 
assessment by placing an “X” under the appropriate heading. 

Applicant performance factors are: 

A. Institutional Capacity 
B. Quality of Service 
C. Timeliness of Performance 
D. Teaming Arrangements 
Adjectival ratings are defined below and should be used as a reference in assessing performance: 
OUTSTANDING Applicant’s performance significantly exceeded the agreement 
requirements. 
GOOD Applicant’s performance exceeded the agreement requirements. 
SATISFACTORY Applicant’s performance met agreement requirements. 
UNSATISFACTORY Applicant’s performance was less than acceptable and was unable to 
perform the agreement requirements successfully. 
N/A Not applicable 

67 | Page 


A Institutional 
Capacity 
Outstanding Good 
Acceptable Unsatis 
factory N/A Additio 
nal 
Comm 
ents 
1. Did Applicant 
provide effective 
contract/agreement 
and project 
management? 
2. How effective 
has the 
Applicant been 
in understanding 
and responding 
to Customer’s 
Organization? 
3. Did the Applicant 
establish and 
maintain effective 
quality control 
standards and 
procedures? 
4. Did the Applicant 
demonstrate cost 
efficiencies in 
performing the 
required effort and 
was the effort 
performed within the 
estimated cost/price? 

B QUALITY OF 
SERVICES 
Outstandi 
ng 
Good Acceptable Unsatisfact 
ory 
N/A Additional 
Comments 

68 | Page 


1. Did the Applicant 
provide quality 
services? 
2. Did the Applicant 
provide quality 
reports and 
documentation (i.e., 
accurate,current and 
complete)? 
3. Was the Applicant 
able to solve any 
performance 
problems without 
extensive guidance 
from the Customer 
Organization 
counterparts? 
4. Did the 
Applicant 
supply 
professional and 
qualified 
personnel? 
5. Did the Applicant 
respond to emerging 
situations to include 
staffing and 
responsiveness? 
C TIMELINESS OF 
PERFORMANCE 
Outstandi 
ng 
Good Acceptable Unsatisfact 
ory 
N/A Additional 
Comments 
1. Did the Applicant 
adhere to the 
deliverable/report 
schedules in the: 
(a) Performance of 
Services? 

69 | Page 


(b) Delivery of 
reports and other 
documentation? 
(c) Qualified 
Staffing? 
D TEAMING 
ARRANGEMENTS 
Outstanding Good Acceptable Unsatisfactory N/A Additional 
Comments 
1. Did the Applicant 
have an effective 
partnership with its 
team members? 
2. What percentage 
of the 
contract/agreement 
work was 
performed by 
Applicant? 
3. Did the Applicant 
effectively manage 
sub‐grant programs? 
4. Did the Applicant 
utilize local 
organizations and/or 
networks 
effectively? 

END OF PAST PERFORMANCE QUESTIONNAIRE 
[END OF ANNEX 2] 

70 | Page 


ANNEX 3: PRELIMINARY GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION 
ANALYSIS 

1. Background 
Pursuant to Automated Directives System (ADS) 2058 and in alignment with the United States 
Agency for International Development’s (USAID) ‘Gender Equality and Female Empowerment 
Policy’9Individual Operating Units (OU) are responsible for conducting gender analyses at the 
design stage of new projects/programs, and for ensuring that the Policy is implemented 
throughout each stage of the Program Cycle. This Gender Analysis pertains to the design of 
USAID/India’s ‘Pollution and Health Impacts’ project, which aims to enhance the Government 
of India’s efforts to reduce pollution and its health impacts (PHI) by strengthening air pollution 
mitigation systems and practices and reducing exposure. 

USAID/India recently launched its new Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) in 
January 2020. The new CDCS acknowledges that in order for India to accelerate its own 
inclusive development and foster enhanced regional connectivity, all of its citizens must have 
opportunities to participate in the nation’s development free of barriers related to gender, sex, 
identity, geography, disability status or age. In the next five years USAID/India will measurably 
contribute to gender equality and women’s empowerment (GEWE), prevent or respond to gender 
based violence (GBV), and promote social inclusion. USAID will do this by: ensuring that all its 
strategies, projects, and activity designs are informed by a gender and social inclusion analysis; 
tracking indicators that measure change in social and gender norms and outcomes where 
appropriate; and perhaps most importantly, increasing USAID’s understanding of how gender 
and social inequality impacts India’s future progress. 

The new CDCS emphasizes India’s efforts to reduce pollution and address health impacts. To 
achieve its objectives of reducing pollution and mitigating its health effects, USAID will 
improve air quality (IR2.1) and reduce exposure to air pollution (IR2.2), mainly through 
expanded use of clean energy through public private partnerships (PPPs). These efforts are 
designed to and will benefit all people. USAID will widen their impact by taking explicit account 
of: (1) the disproportionate and severe health effects of household air pollution generated by 
biomass cooking fuels on poor rural and urban women, men and children through transition 
strategies that address this problem; and (2) the opportunity afforded to support women’s 

8 U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), ADS Chapter 205, “Integrating Gender Equality and 
Female Empowerment in USAID’s Program Cycle,” 2017 (as revised) -
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1870/205.pdf 
9USAID, “Gender Equality and Female Empowerment Policy”, 2012 -

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/GenderEqualityPolicy_0.pdf 

71 | Page 


employment and leadership throughout the energy value chain and foster innovations that 
improve women’s access to and use of clean energy products. 

It is important to note that a Gender Analysis is not a “woman’s analysis,” but needs to consider 
the different threats, impacts, and opportunities of males and females. As such, this analysis 
considers these questions and their social/economic implications throughout the various stages of 
the PHI project (improve air pollution mitigation and reduce exposure to air pollution) program 
cycle– from activity design and implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning 
and adapting. Throughout the Gender Analysis and in the design and implementation of PHI 
project, USAID and its partners will emphasize the importance of equitable provision of 
services, as well as means to promote women to be actively engaged as decision-makers in 
energy sector policies, and proportionately involved in various aspects of the value chain - not 
only as consumers, but also in planning, and participants within the multiple sector workforces. 
Core to this approach, is continuously measuring the level of men’s and women’s engagement. 

2. Main Findings by Domain 
Evidence of gender inequality in India is stark. India ranks 108 out of 149 countries included in 
the World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Index on the basis of four indicators: economic 
participation and opportunity, educational attainment, health and survival, and political 
empowerment, and specifically ranks 110 out of 149 countries for the Health and Survival index. 
Per National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4) report, India has made remarkable progress in 
reducing its maternal mortality ratio to 130 per 100,000 live births (2016), but the rate is still 
high, particularly in the poorest states. There are 63 million “missing women” in India due to son 
preference, sex selective abortions, and post-natal neglect of girls and women in nutrition and 
healthcare. This highlights the disproportionate challenges that Indian women face across all 
sectors. 

Notwithstanding this situation, the GOI has recognized gender equality and women’s 
empowerment as key, not only to the health of the nation, but also to its social and economic 
development. There is growing importance given to addressing gender-based inequities and 
developing gender-sensitive policies and programs in the health and energy sector. 

There is a growing body of evidence that demonstrates that when energy laws, policies, projects 
and other market development activities are done in a gender-informed manner, where the needs 
and priorities of all people are taken into account, those energy sector components are more 
likely to effectively meet the needs of the whole population and are more able to deliver better 
and more impactful outcomes for society as a whole, and women and girls in particular. 

2.1 Laws, Policies, Regulations, and Institutional Practices. 
In the context of this analysis, ‘laws’ include formal statutory laws and informal and customary 
legal systems that create/enforce these laws. ‘Policies and regulations’ include formal and 

72 | Page 


informal rules and procedures adopted by public institutions for making decisions and taking 
public action regarding the governance of actors in the energy and health sector. ‘Institutional 
practices’ can be formal or informal and include behaviors or norms related to human resources 
(hiring and firing), professional conduct (workplace harassment - a form of gender-based 
violence), and the like. 

There are biological differences between men and women that are often not considered in health 
research.10 According to the U.S. Institute of Medicine, every cell in our bodies has a sex, 
meaning that women and men differ at a cellular level. However, toxicology and biomedical 
research predominantly use male subjects and ignore female subjects.11 Human health pollution 
thresholds created by governments to regulate most chemicals and toxins are determined using 
male physiology. The health sector is only starting to understand the different health impacts 
between men and women associated with pollution. Institutional practices on managing 
pollutants are informed by our scientific understanding of the health effects. Therefore, 
understanding how different pollutants impact women and men differently is critical to ensuring 
gender equality and female empowerment. 

There is growing evidence of sex differences in how certain pollutants affect women, girls, men, 
and boys.12,13 For instance, lung cancer kills more women every year than breast, ovarian, and 
uterine cancers combined.14 Researchers found sex differences in the incidence of respiratory 
diseases. Women are more susceptible to inflammatory lung disease induced by air pollution, 
and show worse adverse pulmonary health outcomes than men.15 Air pollution is also a major 
risk factor for cardiovascular disease.16 Recently, Harvard researchers discovered that women 
with diabetes exposed to particulate matter (PM) have a 44% greater risk for cardiovascular 

10 Sims, J., & Butter, M. (2002). Health and Environment: Moving Beyond Conventional Paradigms. In G.
Sen, A. George, & P. Östlin (Eds.), Engendering International Health: The Challenge of Equity (pp. 210235). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
11 Westervelt, A. (2015, April 30). The medical research gender gap: how excluding women from clinical 
trials is hurting our health. The Guardian. Last accessed on October 2, 2019 at 
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/30/fda-clinical-trials-gender-gap-epa-nih-institute-ofmedicine-
cardiovascular-disease 
12 Butter, M.E. (2005). Are Women More Vulnerable to Environmental Pollution? Journal of Human 
Ecology, 20(3), 221-226. https://doi.org/10.1080/09709274.2006.11905931 
13 Clougherty, J.E. (2010). A growing role for gender analysis in air pollution epidemiology. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 118(2), 167-176. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0900994 
14 Westervelt, A. (2015, April 30). The medical research gender gap: how excluding women from clinical 
trials is hurting our health. The Guardian. Last accessed on October 2, 2019 at 
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/30/fda-clinical-trials-gender-gap-epa-nih-institute-ofmedicine-
cardiovascular-disease 
15 Cabello, N., Mishra, V., Sinha, U., et al. (2015). Sex differences in the expression of lung inflammatory 
mediators in response to ozone. American Journal of Physiology Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology, 
309, L1150-L1163. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00018.2015 
16 Sethi, R. (2012). Air Pollution and Disease and Gender. Air and Water Borne Diseases, 1, e116. 
https://doi.org/10.4172/2167-7719.1000e116 

73 | Page 


disease, and 66% increased risk for stroke.17 Also health symptoms from pollution may differ 
between men and women at different ages. For example, air pollution is known to impede 
cognitive performance, especially for men as they get older.18 

In an effort to reduce indoor pollution from cooking fuels, the GOI launched the Ujjwala (Bright) 
Program in 2016 to provide free LPG connections to poor households so they can cook with nonpolluting 
fuel. The LPG connections are registered in the name of an adult woman. By January 
2019, 60 million new households had LPG connections19. In 2017, 44 percent of beneficiaries 
belonged to SC and ST families.20 

2.2 Cultural Norms and Beliefs: 
In a large and diverse country such as India, there is an extreme variance in cultural norms and 
beliefs in India which directly affects the assumed roles and responsibilities of men and women 
in economic activities. Religion, level of education, social standing, and rural versus urban 
residence can all influence collective cultural norms and beliefs. Development policies in India 
have tended to centre more on women’s reproductive rather than productive roles, as shown by 
the amount of investment in population and family planning programmes. Women have 
disproportionate unpaid care work burden, including unpaid work that is heavily impacted by 
whether or not a household has access to affordable and reliable power; in public/social 
situations that are mixed, it is often men who have louder voices and are in stronger positions to 
set cultural, political, and economic agendas; and in rural communities with limited/no access to 
electricity, women and girls are more often responsible for spending time collecting firewood for 
cooking fuel and heating. In India, women on average work nine hours a day compared to the 
seven-hour work day of men. The majority of women’s time is spent on unpaid activities such as 
household chores and caregiving for family members. In addition to contributing to “time 
poverty,” the scarcity of discretionary time available to an individual, the regular task of 
gathering firewood away from home, increases the risk of women and girls being exposed to 
gender-based violence. 

2.3 Gender Roles, Responsibilities and Time Use 
As such a large and diverse country, there is an extreme variance in cultural norms and beliefs, 

17 Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. (2015, November 5). Air pollution and cardiovascular 
disease: increased risk for women with diabetes. Last accessed on October 2, 2019 at 
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/air-pollution-and-heart-disease-raise-risk-for-womenwith-
diabetes/
18 Zhang, X., Chen, X., & Zhang, X. (2018). The impact of exposure to air pollution on cognitive 
performance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 115 (37), 
9193-9197. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1809474115 
19 Narayanan, N , The Modi years: Are More Indians using Cooking Gas because of the Ujjwala Scheme?, 
Scroll, accessed on July 2, 2019 
20 Free LPG Ujjwala scheme achieves 8 cr target before schedule, Outlook, 06 September 2019, accessed 
July 22, 2020 

74 | Page 


and the assumed roles and responsibilities of men and women in economic activities. Gender 
differences in mobility, responsibilities and roles create differences in the personal environments 
of women and men, thus leading to different hazards and exposures. The two main factors 
associated with gender roles and responsibilities, leading to differences in exposure to pollutants 
are: (1) workplace exposure and (2) household exposure. 

Gendered household activities significantly impact female exposure to air pollutants from 
cooking and lighting, and toxins from cleaning products. Household air pollution can be very 
hazardous, depending on the type of fuel, stove, ventilation, and lighting sources of the 
household. Household emissions contribute to approximately 50-60% of premature air pollution 
deaths in India.21 In low and middle income countries, the dominant household energy sources 
are: biomass, dung, coal, and/or kerosene. Without proper ventilation, exposure to particulates 
and hazardous gases can be very high. Current estimates suggest almost half of the world’s 
population rely on biomass for cooking and heating.22 When biomass is scarce, poor 
communities have limited options, causing them to use even more toxic energy sources like the 
burning of plastic, bleached paper, preserved wood, and trash. NFHS-4 (2017) states that 0.7 % 
of lowest quintile households use LPG, Natural Gas or Biogas. Because women and girls do the 
majority of cooking compared to men and boys, they are at greater risk of disease and mortality 
from household air pollution. Health risks to women and infants from household air pollution 
are: respiratory disease, eye infections, depressed immune response, and low birthweight. In 
developing countries, there is a high prevalence of chronic bronchitis in women due to indoor 
smoke from cooking.23 

Outdoor air pollution is also a major concern, which may impact men slightly more than women 
due to occupational differences. Outdoor air pollution, mostly PM2.5, led to 4.2 million 
premature deaths worldwide in 2016.24 91% of the premature deaths occurred in low and middle 
income countries, predominantly in Asia. There is now substantial evidence linking air pollution 
and cardiovascular disease, such that 58% of ambient air pollution premature deaths were due to 
heart disease and strokes. In 2012, the WHO found higher mortality rates for men (53% of 
premature mortalities) than women (44% of premature mortalities) from outdoor air pollution, 

21 Lelieveld, J., Evans, J.S., Fnais, M., et al. (2015). The contribution of outdoor air pollution sources to 
premature mortality on a global scale. Nature, 525, 367-371. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15371 
22 Mortimer, K., Ndamala, C.B., Naunje, A.W., et al. (2017). A cleaner burning biomass-fuelled cookstove 
intervention to prevent pneumonia in children under 5 years old in rural Malawi (the Cooking and 
Pneumonia Study): a cluster randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 389 (10065), 167–175. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32507-7 
23 Sims, J., & Butter, M. (2002). Health and Environment: Moving Beyond Conventional Paradigms. In G.
Sen, A. George, & P. Östlin (Eds.), Engendering International Health: The Challenge of Equity (pp. 210235). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
24 World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). Ambient (Outdoor) Air Quality and Health. Geneva, 
Switzerland: WHO. Last accessed on October 4, 2019 at https://www.who.int/en/news-room/factsheets/
detail/ambient-(outdoor)-air-quality-and-health 

75 | Page 


which in part may be linked to gender differences in occupation. 

2.4 Access to and Control over Assets and Resources 
Monitoring the differential effects of air pollution on women and men, as well as the use and 
exposure to them are critical for securing the health and well-being of both men and women. 
However data collection at national and sub-national levels are quite limited, and varies 
substantially across countries.25 Limited collection, and application of gender-environment 
statistics, affects the ability of decision-makers to implement policies and programming that 
protect both women and men. Due to the persistence of the data gap on gender and the 
environment, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) developed a Gender 
and Environment Resource Center in 2013. The aim is to identify and close data gaps on 
environment and gender information by compiling disaggregated data to inform environmental 
ministries and gender policies and programs.26 While the IUCN’s platform has gathered 
information on a variety of indicators, they are mostly focused at the international level.27 At the 
national and sub-national levels, much progress must be made to increase equal access to 
information and resources on the impacts of pollution to women and girls. Increased capacity can 
help women use productive resources (e.g., social benefits, public services, technology, etc.) to 
prevent and reduce pollution to improve their health and well-being. 

Control over the management of resources in many societies and communities is not equal in 
households. Pollution impacts the quality of natural resources, and in times of environmental 
insecurity, women bear the greatest burden. For example, in India ozone air pollution has led to 
an estimated 14%-16% of wheat and rice yield losses28, thus affecting the food security of rural 
and urban areas.29 In India, crop losses lead to changes in food prices, farm incomes, nutritional 
access, and workloads. The largest impacts are almost always on the most vulnerable groups in 

25 United Nations Environment Program & International Union for Conservation of Nature (UNEP & IUCN). 
(2018). Gender and Environment Statistics: Unlocking Information for Action and Measuring the SDGs. Nairobi, 
Kenya: UNEP. Last accessed on October 4, 2019 at https://genderandenvironment.org/resource/gender-andenvironment-
statistics-unlocking-information-for-action-and-measuring-the-sdgs/
26 IUCN. (n.d.) Gender and Environment Resource Center. Washington, DC: IUCN. Last accessed on October 4, 
2019 at https://genderandenvironment.org/
27 United Nations Environment Program & International Union for Conservation of Nature (UNEP & IUCN). 
(2018). Gender and Environment Statistics: Unlocking Information for Action and Measuring the SDGs. Nairobi, 
Kenya: UNEP. Last accessed on October 4, 2019 at https://genderandenvironment.org/resource/gender-andenvironment-
statistics-unlocking-information-for-action-and-measuring-the-sdgs/
28 Sharma, A. et. al. Revisiting the crop yield loss in India attributable to ozone. Atmospheric Environment: 
X Volume 1, January 2019, 100008. Last accessed on Jul 22, 2020 at 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590162119300115?via%3Dihub 
29 Mortensen, S., & Pandey, D. (2018, June 5). Ozone air pollution and gender inequality in India. Stockholm 
Environment Institute. Last accessed on October 4, 2019 at https://www.sei.org/perspectives/ozone-air-pollutiongender-
inequality-india/ 

76 | Page 


particular poor women.30 

Control of household resources, largely dominated by male family members will also impact 
how health expenditure is used and whether or not expenditure for reduced exposure can be 
incurred. An All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), the Indian Statistical Institute, 
Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council, and Harvard University research study examined 
2,377,028 outpatients records between January to December 2016 to find that only 37% of 
women got access to health care, as compared to 67% of men31. 

Lastly, women play a pivotal role in developing, marketing, and selling clean technologies for 
reducing pollution, such as clean cookstoves. Women around the world are creating technologies 
and businesses to address environmental pollution. Contrary to gender stereotypes, women are 
the highest adopters of technological solutions, especially pollution-reducing technologies, such 
as solar power32 and there may be potential in extending this to the air pollution space. 

2.5 Patterns of Power and Decision-making 
This domain of the Gender Analysis examines the ability of women and men to decide, 
influence, and exercise control over material, human, intellectual, and financial resources, in the 
family, community, and country. As discussed in the examples above, there is an imbalance in 
the representation of women in decision-making positions in the government and throughout the 
energy and health sector. As such, the power dynamic regarding energy and health sector 
planning is skewed greatly toward the opinions, needs, and input of men. However, at the 
household level, many women may have a better understanding of electricity consumption 
patterns, and health needs and may be in a stronger position than men to make informed 
decisions pertaining to health and energy utilization. Likewise when women are included in 
decision-making at high levels in government and the private sector, market development 
activities, policies and energy planning processes are more likely to take into account the 
differential needs and priorities of women and girls. For example, including women in project 
design can help to ensure the inclusion of interventions that specifically meet the needs of 
women that are otherwise not recognized, identified or addressed.33 

30 Mortensen, S., & Pandey, D. (2018, June 5). Ozone air pollution and gender inequality in India. Stockholm 
Environment Institute. Last accessed on October 4, 2019 at https://www.sei.org/perspectives/ozone-air-pollutiongender-
inequality-india/ 
31 Access to health care a distant dream for most Indian women, DW, accessed from DW.com on July 22, 
2020 

32 Earley, K. (2016, July 9). From basket weavers to salt farmers: the women leading a renewables revolution. The 
Guardian. Last accessed on October 14, 2019 at https://www.theguardian.com/sustainablebusiness/
2016/jul/09/women-leading-clean-energy-revolution33 USAID and IUCN, “Advancing Gender in the Environment: Making the Case for Women in the Energy 
Sector,” 2018 -https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/IUCN-USAIDMaking_
case_women_energy_sector.pdf 

77 | Page 


3. Analysis Of Issues And Recommendations By Technical Component 
In consideration of the aforementioned domains examined, there are a number of 
recommendations that pertain to USAID’s design, management, and monitoring of the project at 
large: 

Technical Components and 
Expected Results 
Potential Gender Issues 
and Relevance to 
Illustrative 
Interventions 
Recommendations, Specific Actions, 
General Consideration 
Objective 1: Improve air Data and evidence do Ensure that opportunities for capacity 
pollution mitigation: not regularly exist to 
explain the impacts of 
building and exchanges are promoted 
to potentially marginalized/ 
● 
Result 1.1: Improved pollution vis-a-vis 
gender differences. 
underrepresented individuals in the 
workforce, to ensure the broadestcapacity of decision-Without this evidence, possible range of viewpoints aremakers to use policies and actions may considered in the provision of technical 
evidence-based not adequately take into assistance. 
approaches for air 
quality management 
(e.g. atmospheric 
account all populations’ 
needs. 
Due to gender norms, 
Advocate for women’s (in all their 
diversity) participation in the decision 
making process to ensure gendermodeling, cost-benefit communities may not balance of policymakers and other 
analysis); formulate adequately involve stakeholders in any policy discussion. 
policy; implement and women in policy 
enforce mitigation 
actions 
discussions and 
considerations, making 
their needs less well 
known. 
Work with Ministries of Environment 
and Health to leverage and capitalize 
women’s roles and potential 
contributions in the energy value chain 
● 
Result 1.2: Community in policies, programs and interventions; 
members are 
empowered to advocate Encourage gender focal points to 
and act for improved 
air quality 
develop internal institutional 
frameworks to increase women’s 
participation, as well as to provide 
input to other relevant ministries’ and 
● 
Result 1.3: Increased stakeholders’ gender diversity 
use of market-based initiatives (women should be part of 
approaches to mitigate 
pollution that 
complement traditional 
design team that will conduct some of 
these studies) The mechanism will 
ensure that women have an equitable 
role in the design of energy sector 
regulatory approaches analyses. 
● 
Result 1.4: Increased The mechanism will work with 
deployment of stakeholders and local/international 
gender specialists to ensure analyses 

78 | Page 


mitigation technologies are appropriately structured in scope, 
and systems, including and take serious consideration of 
source elimination, 
cleaner energy, air 
economic roles of women (many of 
which may be informal), and the 
environmental impact onpollution control underrepresented members ofdevices, and improved communities. 
landscape management. 
Objective 2: Reduce exposure Data and evidence do Create gender specific 
to air pollution not regularly exist to 
explain the impacts of 
outreach/communication material; and 
ensure that information pertaining to 
● 
Result 2.1: Improved pollution vis-a-vis 
gender differences. 
pollution and health are delivered in a 
medium accessible to women. 
capacity of decision-Without this evidence, 
makers to use policies and actions may Involve men and family members to 
evidence-based not adequately take into change some of the norms that govern 
approaches for 
reducing exposure and 
account all populations’ 
needs. 
indoor household air pollution. 
improving health 
Some behaviors are 
● 
Result 2.2: The anchored in cultural 
evidence base for high-expectations and norms. 
impact health 
interventions is 
expanded 
It may be very difficult 
to change those beliefs 
and norms to reduce 
exposure risks. 
● 
Result 2.3: Increased Gender roles and 
adoption of behavioral 
change for exposure 
reduction 
responsibilities may 
limit the possibility to 
improve indoor 
environments if women 
do not have a say in 
● 
Result 2.4: Improved finances or household 
indoor environments modifications. 

END OF PRELIMINARY GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION 
ANALYSIS 

[END OF ANNEX 3] 

79 | Page 


 END OF NOFO 

80 | Page 


