

NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY 













 



































Horizontal_RGB_600
NIGER MARKETS AND NUTRITION ACTIVITY 









USAID/SENEGAL 

SAHEL REGIONAL OFFICE (SRO) 

NOFO NO.: 72068520RFA00001 



OCTOBER 2019 










Issue Date: October 9, 2019 

Deadline for Questions: October 18, 2019 

Closing Date: November 11, 2019 

Closing Time: 17:30 Local Dakar, Senegal Time 



Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72068520RFA00001 



Program Title: Niger Markets and Nutrition Activity 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 



Ladies/Gentlemen: 



The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the Niger Markets and Nutrition 
program. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 



USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. 



To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 



USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.h. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 



Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 





Section A – Program Description Page 5 





Section B – Federal Award Information Page 38 





Section C – Eligibility Information Page 40 





Section D – Application and Submission Information Page 41 





Section E – Application Review Information Page 58 





Section F – Federal Award Administration Information Page 60 





Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts Page 72 





Section H – Other Information Page 73 



ANNEXES 

Annex #1 - Summary Budget Template Page 74 

Annex #2 - Standard Provisions Page 75 

Annex #3 - Abbreviations and Acronyms Page 78 

Annex #4 - SAM quick start guide for new foreign registration Page 80 

Annex #5 - SAM quick start guide for new grantee registration Page 81 

Annex #6: Past Performance Information Page 82 

Annex #7: Resources Page 83 

Annex #8: List of Communes Page 86 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 



This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 





Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by 
USAID to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development 
Objectives. Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” and 
“Project” as used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and implementation of 
USAID development assistance. 




































































NIGER MARKETS AND NUTRITION ACTIVITY 

Section A: Program Description 



1. Executive summary 



The countries of the Sahel are characterized by chronic food insecurity, poor health status, 
persistent poverty, weak governance, high population growth rates, and recurrent climate shocks, 
which together may drive vulnerable communities into crisis, conflict and violent extremism. 
USAID’s regional Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE II) initiative addresses these 
intertwined challenges through strategic layering and sequencing of development and life-saving 
humanitarian assistance. RISE II also contributes to USAID’s regional efforts to reduce 
vulnerability to extremism under the Sahel Development Partnership (SDP). 



Well-functioning markets that sustainably support livelihoods and human well-being are central 
to achieving resilience in the face of shocks and stresses. Households that remain below the 
poverty line do not have the ability to invest in the types of assets or profitable diversified 
livelihoods that can sustain them through periods of crisis. Sustainably escaping poverty requires 
that households move beyond subsistence activities to ones that produce a surplus they can sell to 
earn income to invest in further income generation, asset purchases, or their own human capacity 
and well-being. Efficient, resilient markets create the opportunities to obtain inputs and services 
necessary to enhance production, and link producers to buyers who can absorb the excess 
production and pay higher prices for higher quality goods. Markets in turn are essential to 
providing sufficient nutritious foods, particularly in locations or time periods when local 
production is insufficient to meet the need. Global trends show that households, even in the 
poorest and most remote villages, are increasingly buying food, often in more convenient 
processed forms. 



Well-functioning markets are also essential to addressing the growing crisis of violent extremist 
groups in the Sahel. These groups often recruit by providing income and assets and a sense of 
purpose that the poorest, particularly young men, lack. Vibrant markets produce job and 
entrepreneurship opportunities that are productive alternatives to joining violent groups. 



USAID intends to issue two solicitations, one for Niger and one for Burkina Faso that will 
enhance agricultural markets. These two awards will strengthen the market systems for small 
ruminants, poultry, cowpeas, and local nutritious foods by contributing to the following Goal and 
Expected Results: 



M&N Goal: Strengthen market systems to sustainably improve household incomes and 
nutritional status. 



Result 1: Enhanced performance of commodity market systems 

Result 2: Increased utilization of quality inputs and services 

Result 3: Increased local consumption of nutritious, safe foods 




Because M&N is part of the regional RISE II project, it must also contribute to the RISE II 
transformative outcomes and the RISE II cross-cutting objectives, and apply the RISE II 
operational principles (described in Section 2 below). These outcomes, objectives, and principles 
operationalize the fundamental USAID priority of supporting countries and people on their 
journey to self-reliance. 

 

M&N Implementers must collaborate actively with all RISE II partners, as appropriate, to help 
achieve the higher level RISE II objectives to “Increase and sustain economic well-being” and to 
“Improve health, family planning and nutrition outcomes,” and the RISE II Goal that 
“Chronically vulnerable populations in Burkina Faso and Niger, supported by resilient systems, 
effectively manage shocks and stresses and pursue sustainable pathways out of poverty.” 

 

M&N activities must complement other RISE II activities working on markets, finance, 
agricultural livelihoods, governance, and nutrition. In particular, Food for Peace Development 
Food Security Activities (DFSAs) at the village and commune level in Niger and Burkina Faso 
support community level actions to improve livelihoods and nutrition. M&N must also forge 
close collaboration with other planned USAID activities that will enhance availability of finance, 
through mechanisms like credit guarantees, incentive grants, and technical assistance to financial 
institutions. M&N will also need to contribute to the goal of SDP by working in partnership with 
planned USAID activities that promote youth livelihoods and entrepreneurship, and create jobs 
through public private partnerships. 

 

Subject to the availability of funds, the USAID/Senegal Sahel Regional Office (SRO) expects to 
make an award in Niger for a value of approximately $29.5M. The award will include a $2 
million set aside for a crisis modifier that allows the Implementer to undertake additional early 
actions or shock response in the event of a projected or current shock. The funding anticipated for 
this award will come from a number of different USAID funding streams including agriculture, 
nutrition, and private sector development. The activity will also contribute to micro-enterprise 
reporting. USAID also intends to issue a separate solicitation for a companion M&N award in 
Burkina Faso for approximately $19.62M that will have the same results and general technical 
approach. While each award will be separate, the respective Implementers must collaborate 
closely on issues that cross borders and communicate regularly on lessons learned and approaches 
taken. 

 

2. USAID’s approach to building resilience and countering violent extremism in the Sahel 

 

The Sahel today is marked by food and water insecurity, persistent poverty, poor governance, 
high population growth rates, and recurrent climate shocks and stresses that contribute to crises 
and can enhance vulnerability to conflict and violent extremism. USAID and the wider 
development community recognize that the pattern of repeated humanitarian crises over decades 
is partly because local populations lack the means to manage the risks they face and recover when 
a shock occurs. In addition, they are highly vulnerable because of poor health and nutrition status, 
extreme poverty, illiteracy, extended annual lean seasons, indebtedness, gender inequality, 
degraded natural resources, poor access to clean water, sanitation and health services, and low 
agricultural productivity - all exacerbated by persistent governance failures and the resulting weak 
enabling environment. 


 

The Sahel is also marked by a history of conflict and insecurity that has varied over time. Recent 
years have seen a dramatic increase in insecurity driven by violent extremist and criminal groups 
that take advantage of low government presence and are driven by expanding extremist ideologies 
and underlying grievances related to poverty, predatory state behavior, and lack of basic services. 
Burkina Faso, in particular, has seen a recent escalation in deadly attacks that are displacing large 
numbers of people and threatening lives and livelihoods. 

 

Shocks and stressors in the Sahel will become even more severe in the future. Climate projections 
indicate that rainfall will become more intense, unpredictable, and less frequent while average 
temperatures will increase, affecting the frequency and intensity of major droughts and floods in 
the Sahel and confounding the existing vulnerabilities in the region (Fifth Assessment Report, 
IPCC, 2014). Added to this are increased conflict and instability, rapid population growth, and a 
young age structure, where approximately half of the populations in Burkina Faso and Niger are 
below the age of 15. Together, these climate and non-climate trends are exacerbating existing 
vulnerabilities in the region. 

 

In response to these dynamics, USAID is working in the Sahel region to build resilience, defined 
as “the ability of people, households, communities, countries, and systems to mitigate, adapt to, 
and recover from shocks and stresses in a manner that reduces chronic vulnerability and facilitates 
inclusive growth.” (See USAID’s Resilience Policy). In short, resilience is the ability to manage 
adversity and change without compromising future well-being. As this suggests, resilience is a 
necessary condition— or set of capacities— for reducing and ultimately eliminating poverty, 
hunger, malnutrition, and humanitarian assistance needs in the complex risk environments in 
which USAID works and in which poor and chronically vulnerable people live. 

 

Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) 

 

The RISE project was developed in 2012 to implement USAID’s resilience programming in Niger 
and Burkina Faso. The second phase, RISE II, continues the same efforts, but with a refined 
approach. The RISE II goal is that: Chronically vulnerable populations in Burkina Faso and 
Niger, supported by resilient systems, effectively manage shocks and stresses and pursue 
sustainable pathways out of poverty. 

 

This goal statement reflects USAID’s key priorities – that vulnerable populations and individuals 
need to be the actors in their own development, that supportive systems (including but not limited 
to markets, health, natural resources management, early warning and response, and governance 
systems) are essential to their success, that shocks and stressors are central contextual factors that 
must be explicitly addressed, and that our success will be measured by the extent to which these 
communities are able to sustainably progress to a higher level of well-being. 

 

The RISE II goal is transformational, seeking to enhance individual, household, community, and 
institutional capacities to sustain and improve well-being in a dynamic environment of changing 
challenges and opportunities. RISE II seeks to contribute to absorptive, adaptive, and 
transformative resilience capacities and will measure the extent to which those capacities are 
enhanced over the life of RISE II. However, to enhance results, RISE II will provide extra 


attention to those aspects of the resilience capacities that have been shown by research and 
experience to be particularly crucial to sustained resilience in the face of shocks and stresses. 
Under RISE II, these aspects are termed transformative outcomes. All USAID activities should 
contribute to these outcomes: 

 

● Enhanced community leadership of local development 
● Enhanced social capital, through strengthened ties of mutual assistance among 
people 
● Enhanced capacity to learn and adapt among beneficiaries, local partners and 
partner governments 


 

RISE II has the following five objectives that together will contribute to achieving the goal and 
the transformative outcomes. 

 

Objective 1: Enhance social and ecological risk management systems 

Objective 2: Increase and sustain economic well-being 

Objective 3: Improve health, family planning, and nutrition outcomes 

Objective 4: Enhance governance of institutions and organizations 

Objective 5: Enhance social, economic, and political agency of women and youth 

 

While particular USAID implementing partners may have areas of technical focus under these 
objectives, all partners must contribute to Objectives 1, 4, and 5 because these include crosscutting 
elements. Partners must contribute to relevant aspects of enhanced risk management 
shock response under Objective 1, to enhanced capacity of relevant local organizations under 
Objective 4, and to the empowerment of women and youth under Objective 5. The five 
objectives are elaborated more fully in the RISE II results framework (below) and in the 
Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) II Technical Approach Working Paper. 

 

To achieve its goal and objectives, RISE II has the following operational principles that must be 
applied by all partners: 

● Community-led development – Through dialogue, support communities to develop and 
implement priority actions that address core challenges and opportunities 
● Systems strengthening - Analyze and seek to strengthen formal and informal systems 
that build resilience and improve well-being 
● Inclusive targeting - Support the poorest households by responding to their specific 
needs, enhancing their aspirations, and strengthening their ability to access resources and 
services to pursue pathways out of poverty 
● Collaboration for collective impact - Seek active collaboration among RISE II 
implementers, host country governments, community leaders, the private sector, civil 
society, USG agencies and partners, international agencies, and donors to collectively 
benefit chronically vulnerable populations 


 

USAID intends to implement RISE II in a targeted geography (a zone of intervention) in which 
multiple partners implement complementary programs in the same areas and can program 


collaboratively. In Niger, the RISE II zone of intervention encompasses parts of Tillaberi, Maradi, 
and Zinder regions. In Burkina Faso, the RISE II zone of intervention is the Centre Nord region. 
The RISE II/SDP map is included below. Complementary investments will be made at the 
national levels as well. The zone of intervention may be adjusted during the lifetime of RISE II in 
response to changing situations on the ground, U.S. Government (USG) priorities, resource 
availability, and other challenges or opportunities. 

 

For additional information, Applicants should refer to the resources provided on the Sahel 
Regional Office website, the Food for Peace (FFP) FY18 Country Specific Information 
documents for Burkina Faso and Niger, and the Food Security Desk Reviews for Burkina Faso 
and Niger. Applicants should also be familiar with the Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) for 
Niger. 

 


RISE II Results Framework 

 

 

 

 


RISE II/ SDP zones of intervention 

 

 

 

Sahel Development Partnership (SDP) 

 

USAID’s Sahel Development Partnership for Burkina Faso and Niger (SDP) is an integrated 
framework that guides multiple interventions to help stabilize focus areas by countering violent 
extremism and building local communities’ resilience. Through SDP, USAID seeks to halt the 
spread of violent extremist groups, avert costly humanitarian crises, and stem the flow of 
destabilizing migration. The extremist threat in the region creates another layer of shocks and 
stresses that compound existing resilience and development challenges, and introduces a whole 
host of security concerns for the United States and its partners. SDP guides development activities 
that are part of a broader national security partnership with the Burkina Faso and Niger 
governments and affected communities. USAID will implement SDP in coordination with the 
State Department, the Defense Department, and other U.S. Government agencies. 

 

SDP has three flexible implementation arms to enable programming to be adjusted as violent 
extremist organization (VEO) influence is diminished, security is expanded, and opportunities for 
longer-term programming are created. This flexibility will also enable intensive countering 
violent extremism (CVE) programming to deploy elsewhere as conditions in initial areas 
improve: 

 


● Intensive CVE programming and emergency humanitarian interventions in areas with 
active conflict or violent attacks (“hot” areas) in Tillaberi, Niger, and the Sahel and Est 
(and increasingly Centre Nord) regions of northern Burkina Faso to address immediate 
VEO threats 
● Transitional livelihood, governance, and CVE programming focused on “warm” areas and 
former “hot” areas as conditions improve 
● Multi-sector resilience and development programming (e.g. RISE II) in more stable 
“buffer” areas prone to recurrent humanitarian crises with the flexibility to expand into 
former warm and hot zones as conditions further improve and resources allow. 


 

SDP areas of intervention will likely change based on the dynamic security situation. 

 

More information on USAID/West Africa’s CVE approach is available at Fact Sheet: Countering 
Violent Extremism in West Africa. 

 

U.S. Government’s Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) 

 

Niger was designated one of twelve GFSS target countries. The GFSS Niger Country Plan, a 
requirement for all target countries, has the goal to “Sustainably reduce global hunger, 
malnutrition, and poverty in Niger.” The GFSS in Niger contributes to improving agricultural and 
livestock production and productivity, reducing malnutrition, increasing macroeconomic growth, 
managing annual and less frequent shocks and stresses, developing and strengthening the private 
sector, reinforcing government reforms, and countering violent extremism. 

 

The plan highlights building resilience, to be implemented through the RISE II portfolio of 
activities that align GFSS funding in the agriculture sector with complementary funding in health 
and governance. RISE II also builds the foundation for agricultural growth by strengthening 
market systems in targeted value chains, including enhancing access to finance and improving the 
policy enabling environment. Under the GFSS, USAID’s agricultural programs also contribute to 
addressing drivers of support for violent extremist groups by strengthening economic 
opportunities for vulnerable communities in the SDP zone, particularly through enhancing youth 
livelihoods. 

 

The Millennium Challenge Corporation Niger Compact contributes to the GFSS by investing a 
portion of its total $437 million into access to water for agriculture and livestock. MCC is also 
programming $45 million in alignment with the World Bank’s Regional Sahel Pastoralism 
Support Project (PRAPS) and $51.1 million in alignment with the World Bank’s Climate 
Resilient Agriculture projects. MCC also engages on a variety of policy reform issues. For 
example, the compact is conditional on the implementation of reforms to the fertilizer sector. 
While MCC irrigation and road infrastructure investments are largely outside the RISE II and 
SDP zones, portions of the livestock and climate resilient agriculture activities do occur in the 
RISE II and SDP areas. 

 

The United States African Development Foundation (USADF), the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA), and the U.S. Department of State also contribute to the GFSS in Niger. 
USADF works with small scale farmers and businesses by providing capacity building and 


financial support, USDA funds school feeding programs, engages on regional trade issues, and 
provides targeted technical assistance to the government and agricultural sector actors, and the 
Department of State promotes policy priorities and US business investments and engagement. 

 

M&N in relation to RISE II and SDP 

 

M&N is one of the central activities that will contribute to both RISE II and SDP. Under RISE II, 
M&N will contribute to the goal of enhancing supportive resilient systems, in this case market 
systems, in order to improve economic well-being and nutrition. M&N also contributes to 
improved management of shocks and stresses, enhanced civil society capacity, and empowerment 
of women and youth. As part of the resilience portfolio, M&N must also seek to enhance the 
RISE II transformative outcomes and apply the RISE II operational principles in its approach to 
achieving desired results. M&N will work intensively in the RISE II zone, in particular making 
sure to cover all the communes served by the DFSAs, as well as continuing to support previous 
Resilience & Economic Growth in the Sahel - Accelerated Growth (REGIS-AG) beneficiaries. In 
the SDP zone of Tillaberi in Niger, M&N contributes to the multi-sector resilience and 
development programming “implementation arm” of the SDP by enhancing economic 
opportunities for populations vulnerable to recruitment by violent extremist organizations. M&N 
activities in SDP zones should first seek to continue support to previous REGIS-AG beneficiaries, 
and then, as resources and security allow, engage with additional market actors. 

 

M&N is also designed to meet the requirements, including reporting and monitoring 
requirements, of the GFSS. M&N will also need to closely coordinate with MCC programs on 
topics of mutual interest, such as (but not exclusively) agriculture-related policy, livestock market 
systems, and agricultural inputs and services. 

 

3. Collaborative implementation approach to improve economic well-being and nutrition 

 

RISE II, SDP, and the GFSS are being executed collaboratively, with multiple USAID 
Implementing Partners contributing in complementary ways to shared high-level goals. In 
partnership with other USAID activities, M&N’s expected results (detailed in Section 6) map to 
the following Objectives and Intermediate Results (IRs) of RISE II: 

 

Objective 1: Enhance social and ecological risk management systems 

IR 1.3 Improved management of shocks, risks and stresses 

 

Objective 2: Increase and sustain economic well-being 

IR 2.1 Improved agricultural and pastoral livelihoods 

IR 2.2 Diversified economic opportunities 

IR 2.3 More inclusive and resilient market systems 

IR 2.4 Increased utilization of financial services 

IR 2.5 Improved human capacity, especially for women and youth 

 

Objective 3: Improve health, family planning, and nutrition outcomes 


IR 3.3 Improved health, family planning, hygiene and nutritional practices (M&N 
contributions to IR 3.3 will focus on nutrition-sensitive practices and behaviors 
related to diets) 

IR 3.4 Increased access to affordable, nutritious, safe foods 

 

Objective 4: Enhance governance of institutions and organizations 

IR 4.2 Strengthened local civil society and community based organizations 

 

Objective 5: Enhanced social, economic, and political agency of women and youth 

 

While M&N is expected to contribute to the shared RISE II goals, it should focus on achieving 
the specific M&N activity goal and expected results and engage with other USAID partners postaward 
to develop collaborative strategies for shared RISE II goals. The broad respective roles 
and potential areas of collaboration of different USAID partners’ activities with M&N are 
outlined in Section 6. Below are brief descriptions of the most relevant USAID partner activities: 

 

Sahel Collaboration and Communication (SCC) 

SCC aims to build collaboration across RISE II and SDP partners, develop and implement a 
shared learning agenda, and enhance communication about USAID programs to external 
audiences. SCC will sponsor collaboration and learning events and processes that engage USAID 
partners, governments, and a diversity of beneficiaries. SCC will facilitate the identification and 
validation of shared long-term and short term goals to which relevant partners will contribute 
collaboratively. While SCC will not support partners in their individual activity monitoring and 
evaluation, SCC will facilitate partners to agree on measures and indicators of progress toward 
their shared goals, and facilitate discussions on how to attribute results to their respective 
contributions. Within this broad framework, specialized technical activities, such as Markets and 
Nutrition, will be responsible to technically lead working groups, with the facilitative support of 
SCC. The complete set of collaboration and communications expectations for M&N are outlined 
in Section 9. The NOFO for SCC is available in the archives of grants.gov. SCC was recently 
awarded to Mercy Corps with a start date of September 1, 2019. 

 

Food for Peace (FFP) Development Food Security Activities (DFSAs) 

DFSAs aim to reduce poverty, reduce stunting and enhance food security of the most vulnerable 
households. DFSAs include a comprehensive package of interventions designed to enhance 
agricultural and pastoral production, diversify livelihoods, empower women and youth, build 
individual capacity (such as literacy), improve the health and nutritional status of targeted 
populations, and strengthen local governance. DFSAs tend to focus on household, village and 
commune level interventions, but may also engage with outside or higher level actors as needed. 
Each DFSA is taking its own approach to these challenges, so the M&N Implementer will need to 
develop collaborative relationships with each separately. FFP has awarded three DFSAs in Niger: 

 

Wadata Food for Peace Development Food Security Activity 

● Partner: Save the Children with CLUSA, the Kaizen Company, and DEMI-E 
● Award: $50 million, 2018-2022 
● Geographic focus: Niger -Zinder (Guidiguir, Damagaram Takaya, Guidimouni, 
Mazamni) 



● Program description: Three integrated intervention areas--enhanced collective 
action to address food, nutrition, and water security shocks and stresses; increased 
capacities, assets, and agency for improved access to adequate and diverse foods at 
all times; and improved nutrition, health, and hygiene for pregnant and lactating 
women, adolescents, children under five, and their families. Wadata links to Save 
the Children’s 2012-2018 development activity. 


 

Hamzari Food for Peace Development Food Security Activity 

● Partner: CARE with Water Aid, Karkara, ANBEF, Forsani, and DEMI-E 
● Award: $33 million, 2018-2022 
● Geographic focus: Niger - Maradi (Chadakori, Guidan Sori, Guidan Roumdji) 
● Program description: CARE aims to build sustainable, equitable, and resilient 
food and nutrition security for vulnerable groups. CARE will address four main 
drivers of hunger in Maradi: high vulnerability to shocks and extreme poverty; 
limited accessibility, availability, and utilization of nutritious foods; poor water, 
sanitation, and hygiene behaviors and inadequate access to water; and lack of 
livelihoods diversity. 


 

Girma Food for Peace Development Food Security Activity 

● Partner: CRS with ICRISAT, DEMI-E, ADC, EDC, IRH of Georgetown, Tufts 
University, and Viamo 
● Award: $70 million, 2018-2022 
● Geographic focus: Niger - Zinder (Bande, Dantchio, Dogo Dogo, Gouchi, Kwaya, 
Malawa, Sassoumbroum, Wacha, Yekua, Magaria, Dungass) 
● Program description: CRS’s activity uses a multi-sectoral, layered, and 
participatory approach that is sensitive to gender, youth, persons with disabilities, 
and climate change. With interventions designed to strengthen maternal and child 
health, nutrition, agriculture, and civil society, CRS intends to improve and sustain 
resilience and food and nutrition security among extremely poor and chronically 
vulnerable communities. This activity leverages gains and lessons learned from 
CRS’s previous DFSA in Niger, which assisted approximately 600,000 people. 


 

Finance activities 

USAID’s Development Credit Authority loan guarantees in Niger have ended and a decision has 
not been reached about whether new ones will be granted. USAID is designing new 
programming for both Burkina Faso and Niger to enhance the availability of finance to 
beneficiaries through incentive grants and transaction assistance. 

 

Youth livelihoods activities 

Under the SDP, USAID is designing a new youth activity, Youth Connect, in Niger to enhance 
livelihood alternatives for youth. The Youth Connect RFI was recently published on grants.gov 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

USAID will be partnering with the private sector to create jobs and bring services to populations 
in the targeted regions. This includes investments facilitated by the forthcoming West Africa 
Trade Hub. 




Agricultural research activities 

USAID supports a wide range of agricultural research and technology development partnerships 
active in the Sahel. These include the Sustainable Intensification Innovation Lab, the Livestock 
Innovation Lab, the Sorghum Millet Innovation Lab, the Soils Consortium, and possibly others in 
the future. USAID also funds Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
(CGIAR) member organization research in the Sahel. 



Regional agricultural activities 

USAID/West Africa supports the West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research 
and Development (CORAF/WECARD) through the PAIRED agreement to enhance access to 
high quality seeds. They also support the International Fertilizer Development Center (IFDC) to 
improve access to fertilizers and soil fertility management technologies. 



Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) 

The MCC compact in Niger is focused on agriculture and pastoral development. Aspects relevant 
to RISE II include support for pastoral livelihoods, promotion of climate-smart agriculture, and 
partnership with the Government of Niger to reform the fertilizer sector. 



Breakthrough-ACTION (B-A) 

USAID accesses cutting-edge social and behavior change (SBC) expertise through Breakthrough- 
ACTION and other specialized mechanisms. These activities will develop, pilot, test and scale up 
SBC approaches and tools in collaboration with other USAID partners and partner governments. 
They will help the government at national and local levels to design and implement SBC 
strategies and campaigns to promote high priority behaviors and other supportive behaviors. 



Health Services Delivery (HSD) 

The Health Services Delivery NOFO was released August 23, 2019. HSD will enhance the 
quantity and quality of health services delivered in the RISE II and SDP zones by strengthening 
the health system. HSD will address nutrition by enhancing health clinic capacity to monitor and 
diagnose nutritional deficiencies, supporting social and behavior change interventions through 
health clinics and health workers, enhancing community-level social groups (such as mother-tomother 
groups), and ensuring provision of treatment for acute malnutrition (Ready-to-Eat 
Therapeutic Foods) through health clinics. 



TerresEauVie (TEV) 

TEV focuses on enhancing land and water resource management for multiple uses, including 
water for household, livestock and agriculture, and land for agriculture and grazing. TEV also 
enhances secure access to land, supports access to climate services, and assists other USAID 
partners in risk reduction and shock response planning and implementation. Winrock 
International is the lead implementing partners on TEV. More information is available here. 



Local governance activities 

USAID has a portfolio of local governance activities, both active, as well as in design, that aim to 
build the functionality, responsiveness, and accountability of local government. While other 
Implementers may interface with local authorities on specific technical matters, the governance 


activities support enhancements that serve all sectors. In Tillaberi, USAID’s local governance and 
citizen engagement work is being implemented by Participatory, Responsive Governance - 
Principal Activity (PRG-PA) implemented by Counterpart International. Planned local 
governance support in Maradi and Zinder will be implemented under the Resilient Governance in 
Niger (RGN) activity. The Request for Information (RFI) for RGN is available in the grants.gov 
archive and USAID anticipates releasing the NOFO shortly. 

 

Sahel Human Voice in Governance Activity (SHIGA) 

SHIGA is a USAID activity in Niger to support national policy reform in response to citizen 
mobilization that was awarded to Financial Services Volunteer Corps (FSVC) in June 2019. 
SHIGA partners with other USAID Implementers to help mobilize civil society in support of 
reforms, as well as build parliamentary and Ministry capacity to understand and respond. 

 

4. Markets and Nutrition activity goal and expected results 

 

M&N Goal: Strengthen market systems to sustainably improve household incomes and 
nutritional status. 

 

This goal aims to achieve sustainable, transformative impacts by working at the system level so 
that increasingly resilient market systems deliver the desired impacts of increased income and 
improved nutritional status. USAID will be successful when the desired impacts are being 
generated endogenously without subsidy or direct intervention. This goal requires a long time 
horizon to be fully realized, but significant progress can be made within the time-frame of this 
five-year activity. USAID recognizes that income and nutritional status alone will not make 
households resilient; the full portfolio of RISE II activities will address complementary resilience 
capacities for households. 

 

Working at the market system level is important because it can also contribute to agriculture-led 
economic growth. Niger has a primarily agricultural economy with potential to enhance basic 
productivity as well as value addition. The target commodities are regionally traded, with the 
potential to improve the balance of trade and increase inflows of revenue and investment. Overall 
sectoral growth driven by professionalization and competitiveness will result in multiplicative 
economic impacts and increased national and local state revenues. In the end, only wide-based 
inclusive growth can lift sufficient households out of poverty and mitigate economic drivers of 
support for violent extremist organizations. 

 

In order to achieve this goal, the Activity will address 3 critical results areas: 

 

Result 1: Enhanced performance of commodity market systems 

Result 2: Increased utilization of quality inputs and services 

Result 3: Increased local consumption of nutritious, safe foods 

 

In its approach to achieving these results, the Activity should contribute to the cross-cutting RISE 
II transformative outcomes: 

● Enhanced community leadership of local development 
● Enhanced social capital, through strengthened ties of mutual assistance among people 



● Enhanced capacity to learn and adapt among beneficiaries, local partners and partner 
governments 




Interventions must also contribute to the RISE II cross-cutting results: 

● Improved management of shocks, risks, and stresses 
● Enhanced governance of institutions and organizations 
● Enhanced social, economic, and political agency of women and youth 




Finally, as part of the SDP, M&N is expected to contribute to addressing the drivers of 
vulnerability to violent extremism, particularly in terms of enhancing economic opportunities. 



5. M&N technical approach to achieving expected results 



The Implementer’s plan to achieve the results above should be informed by a strong theory of 
change, coupled with robust adaptive management mechanisms. 



While collaboration among USAID partners is often necessary to achieve the higher level shared 
RISE II and SDP goals, where there is a core expected result for M&N, the Applicant’s approach 
and level of effort should include all necessary components to achieve the results. M&N includes 
a six-month refinement period (discussed in Section 9) during which the Implementer will consult 
widely to determine areas of overlap and gaps, forge collaborations, collect information and 
review the theory of change. The Implementer will then submit to USAID a revised project 
document and a work plan for the rest of the year. The refinement period exists because USAID 
recognizes that plans often need to change once the team is on the ground, particularly when there 
are interdependencies with other actors. 



USAID encourages the Implementer to take into account the following technical considerations 
when designing the approach, bearing in mind the specific shock-prone context. 



Market systems strengthening: 

M&N should implement a market systems strengthening approach to achieve its goal and 
expected results. This approach is facilitative and focused on sustainability, implementing the 
exit strategy from day one. A market system consists of all the market actors that collectively 
produce, add value, and deliver the product to the end consumer. Commodity market systems are 
linked to supportive market systems (or cross-market functions) such as those for agricultural 
inputs, technical services, and financial investment. Strengthening market systems involves 
enhancing linkages, building capacity of market actors, and establishing supportive environments 
that create incentives for more efficient, competitive, and inclusive markets. USAID is also 
interested in promoting market resilience which means that the market system is flexible, contains 
redundant and diverse elements and linkages, and adapts to changing circumstances. Some of the 
main areas for interventions within the market system approach include: 



Improving market system structure and governance by strengthening vertical and horizontal 
linkages among value chain actors to improve market access and aggregation functions as well as 
to address failures in cooperation and/or cases of destructive competition. The quality of these 
linkages matters beyond the transaction of the sale, as they also represent potential conduits for 


the transfer of learning, information and technical, financial and business services. The 
inclusiveness of market systems must also be enhanced such that the poor, marginalized, women 
and youth are able to participate profitably in market opportunities and in market governance. 
Market systems include both public and private actors, so the approach should engage with 
governments to encourage, for example, commune governance that supports markets with publicprivate 
partnerships. 

 

Enhancing the capacity of market system actors especially their business, financial, and 
organizational effectiveness. Actors should be able to assess market opportunities, plan their 
approach, obtain necessary resources and services, implement, and then adjust on the basis of how 
well they are achieving their short- and long-term business goals. Capacity building should be 
delivered in a manner that utilizes and strengthens market relationships, reinforces local business 
service providers, and paves the way for longer term sustainable access to supportive services. 

 

Enhancing individual capacities of women, youth and marginalized individuals by building 
functional literacy. Literacy, including numeracy and financial literacy, are foundational skills 
that should help individuals participate in business, organizational, and household decision 
making. Capacity building should also include developing important soft skills that help 
individuals successfully obtain and sustain employment, as well as function in market 
interactions. M&N’s capacity building activities, including literacy, should focus on the market 
participants supported by M&N, such as producer group members or small entrepreneurs. 

 

USAID seeks further understanding about the linkages between functional literacy and market 
success. The Implementer is encouraged to conduct a comparative study where the impacts on 
the producer groups’ performance and on the individual outcomes of the participants are assessed 
relative to groups who did not receive the training. Meaning, the Implementer could conduct a 
randomized control trial (RCT) whereby some producer groups participate in functional literacy 
activities as well as other M&N activities while other producer groups only participate in other 
M&N activities (no functional literacy activities) to study the differences in the groups’ 
performance and individual outcomes for an initial period of M&N. These findings will inform 
adaptive management of M&N literacy activities. The Implementer should budget for this study, 
balancing budget and rigor. USAID is available to collaborate on final study design. 

 

Stimulating and leveraging financial services can be the core intervention of a market system 
approach. Market actors should have access to, and use, a variety of finance sources to enhance 
their competitiveness, including within-chain financing (such as from buyers to producers, or 
wholesalers to retailers), external financing (such as from financial institutions), and investments 
through partnerships. Actors will need assistance to prepare requests for finance, and then 
monitoring and coaching on the use and repayment of that finance. Financial institutions need to 
better understand the needs, constraints and abilities of these new customers, as well as the 
potentials and challenges in the targeted commodity sectors. USAID is separately providing 
support to financial institutions through credit guarantees, technical assistance, and other loan 
incentives. The Implementer will be able to leverage those USAID investments, but should not 
be completely dependent on them. The technical approach of Markets and Nutrition should 
include all the components necessary to facilitate beneficiaries obtaining the finance they require. 
Depending on beneficiary challenges, this may include working with financial institutions. Once 


the additional finance activities are awarded, M&N implementers will need to seek synergies with 
those new partners and negotiate, with USAID’s assistance, respective roles and contributions. 

 

Increasing production to meet market demand is often necessary to attain sufficient 
profitability and competitiveness. Production increases occur at all stages: from raw commodities 
to processed products. Meeting quality and food safety requirements is necessary to obtain the 
best prices and build loyal customers. Market demand for new or improved products, such as 
those with greater nutritional value or safety, may need to be built through demand-creation 
activities. 

 

The enabling environment can either hinder, or enhance, market functioning. Improvements to 
the enabling environment such as public investments or policy reform are often stimulated by 
stakeholder lobbying, requiring investments in association building, lobbying capacity, supportive 
analyses, and actions guided by political economy analyses. 

 

Economic analyses: 

USAID encourages the use of a variety of analytical tools to assess options and guide adaptive 
management. Cost-benefit analysis models commissioned by USAID on a number of agricultural 
interventions should be kept up to date by the Implementer to inform programming decisions. 
Additional cost-benefit analyses, economic rate of return, and profitability analyses should be 
regular tools used by the Implementer and market actors to guide decision making. 

 

Nutrition-sensitive approach: 

The Implementer should identify nutrition-sensitive impact pathways and outcomes. At the 
household-level, there are three main impact pathways—food production, agriculture-related 
income, and women’s empowerment. The women’s empowerment pathway includes women’s 
energy expenditures, women’s control and use of income on both food and non-food items, and 
women’s ability to care for themselves and their family. Evidence supports the need to broaden 
our view from the traditional focus on the household pathways, towards food market systems to 
improve the enabling environment which exerts a strong influence on household pathways. 
(SPRING 2018). Nutrition approaches should not be implemented separately from agriculture 
market approaches; instead appropriate nutrition-sensitive objectives and outcomes should be 
identified within agricultural market approaches. A first and critical step is to intentionally 
articulate nutrition-sensitive impact pathways and intermediate outcomes, and to strategically 
choose or design indicators to measure progress along these longer impact pathways. This 
requires understanding and identifying where practices and principles of agriculture markets and 
nutrition are complementary and where the principles are in opposition.(USAID 2016). 

 

Gender, youth, and inclusive development: 

Promoting gender equality, advancing the status of women and girls, and enhancing youth 
participation is vital to achieving the expected results of M&N. Efforts to achieve these results 
must be grounded in a nuanced understanding of local contexts regarding intergenerational and 
gender-related structural constraints, cultural norms, and power dynamics. Interventions need to 
be strategically targeted to address specific constraints or opportunities, be concretely specified, 
and be appropriately monitored to ensure they achieve desired outcomes. 


Applicants will be expected to use a Positive Youth Development approach that engages youth, 
demonstrate compliance with USAID Policy ADS 205 and the USAID Youth in Development 
Policy, and describe how this activity will support the gender and youth policies and strategies of 
USAID and the host government and proactively integrate women and youth as active 
participants and contributors, not just passive recipients. M&N should incorporate the lessons 
learned on gender and youth from the first phase of RISE implementation, from studies on gender 
and youth in the region, and from its own targeted analyses. New analyses should build on rather 
than replicate work done by others. Applicants should articulate how they plan to conduct 
targeted gender and youth analyses to fill gaps relevant to the specific interventions that are 
proposed. 

In addition to targeting of women and youth, all IPs must define strategies for targeting and 
including other beneficiary groups such as indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities, people with 
disabilities, and other underrepresented persons and groups. 

Key references include: 

USAID’s Sahel Youth Analysis prepared for RISE II at 
https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/usaid-sahel-youth-analysis 

USAID’s Youth Power Positive Youth Development (PYD) approach at 
http://www.youthpower.org/ 

A summary of the Gender Analysis is available at 
https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/summary-rise-gender-analysis) 

Conflict Sensitivity/Do No Harm/Atrocity Prevention: 

The Sahel region faces not only environmental challenges, but also a range of political, social, 
and economic threats including, but not limited to, localized disputes over resources, a history of 
non-democratic transitions, trafficking in illicit products, and violent extremist organizations. The 
Implementer should be cognizant of these threats and remain diligent in understanding the impact 
of M&N activities on local economies, social networks, and livelihoods in order to avoid 
exacerbating existing or potential future tensions. M&N is expected to implement in insecure 
zones of SDP, while minimizing risks to its own staff and beneficiaries. Approaches should be 
tailored to that context, working with local actors that can remain active. Populations in insecure 
zones are often supportive of extremist groups, or engage in illegal behaviors, because licit 
activities and official support is lacking. To the extent that licit trade and supportive private 
sector services and inputs can continue, the drivers of extremist support will be reduced. 

 

M&N is also part of USAID’s efforts to prevent atrocities. The Implementer will be expected to 
track and report incidents, trends, and other indicators of risk of atrocities. Atrocities include not 
only loss of life, but also forced displacement, assaults, and other human rights abuses. All 
USAID partners are responsible to report any information that may indicate a potential or actual 
atrocity. In addition, M&N will need to mainstream atrocity prevention approaches and actions 
into its regular programing – actions such as promoting community cohesion and tolerance of 
others, reduction of conflict, respect for human rights, support to victims, and promoting 
psychological safety in the groups with which it works. Applicants are encouraged to review 
USAID’s “Field Guide: Helping Prevent Mass Atrocities” for guidance on approaches. 


 

Building on RISE successes and approaches: 

The Implementer must build on the progress achieved to date under RISE in order to reinforce 
sustainability and local ownership while continuing to enhance performance and outcomes 
through innovation and partnerships. More details about the approach and lessons learned can be 
found in the REGIS-AG mid-term evaluation and in the RISE mid-term performance assessment. 
Information on the commodities targeted under REGIS-AG can be found in their respective endmarket 
analyses – posted on the USAID/SRO website (for a list of more resources see Annex 
#7).). Information on the geography and beneficiaries of REGIS-AG is provided in Annex #8. 

 

Resilience capacity enhancement: 

As part of the RISE II portfolio, M&N must design and implement activities that enhance 
resilience capacities through the manner in which they are implemented. M&N should avoid 
developing separate resilience building interventions, but rather should integrate resilience 
strengthening into interventions that deliver the core M&N activity goal and expected results. 
USAID identified the RISE II transformative outcomes because evidence suggests that they are 
particularly important capacities that help individuals, households, communities, organizations, 
and countries respond to, and recover from, shocks and stresses. They are also capacities that can 
assist households and communities sustainably escape from poverty. M&N should focus on 
developing those capacities. In addition, USAID expects that by following the RISE II 
operational principles M&N will enhance its contribution to those resilience capacities. 
Additional information on USAID’s approach to resilience can be found at 
https://www.usaid.gov/resilience/resources. 

 

6. M&N expected results and illustrative outcomes 

 

The following section elaborates in more detail the results and outcomes USAID expects will be 
achieved as a result of M&N implementation, supported by collaboration with other RISE II and 
SDP partners. 

 

Result 1: Enhanced performance of commodity market systems 

 

USAID chose its target commodities on the basis of their potential to increase the income of large 
numbers of vulnerable people, while also contributing to the supply of nutritious foods locally, 
nationally, and in the West Africa region. Diverse end-markets must be considered in order to 
contribute to agriculture-led economic growth through enhanced market competitiveness and 
scale while also boosting incomes of households in the RISE II and SDP zones. M&N will 
continue the RISE focus on small ruminants, poultry and cowpea, while maintaining flexibility for 
new opportunities. Because the target commodities have very complex and large market systems, 
the Implementer must ensure they remain the primary focus of Result 1. It is important to note 
that USAID wishes to develop cowpea as both human food and animal fodder. The Implementer 
should seek synergies among these commodity systems, such as between cowpea fodder and 
livestock. 

 

The Implementer must build on and strengthen groups, businesses and networks supported by 
REGIS-AG under the first phase of RISE, as well as expand to serve new local market actors in 


RISE II zones covered by FFP DFSAs (see Attachment 2 for a list of communes where these 
activities are located). Where a group, business or network was previously supported, 
interventions should focus on increasing profitability, strengthening and formalizing relationships, 
enhancing local ownership, creating linkages to supportive systems, and 
professionalizing/formalizing organizations as registered business entities. 

 

Illustrative nodes of collaboration: 

USAID seeks to enhance initial collaboration by identifying “nodes of collaboration” – 
intervention areas that require partner collaboration to achieve a higher goal. Below we identify 
some of the expected areas where M&N will need to work closely with other USAID partners. 
As implementation progresses, these nodes may be revised or additional ones added as needed. 
Specific collaboration plans will be negotiated post-award among the relevant parties and will 
seek to clarify roles and timelines, reduce redundancy, and maximize synergies. 

 

When a DFSA-supported livestock, poultry or cowpea producer group is well-established, M&N 
should take on support of that group to grow its capacity as a market actor. If DFSAs are working 
with other types of commodities, M&N may provide limited capacity building to those groups to 
help them professionalize and access the market. The Implementer should also partner with 
USAID’s TerresEauVie (TEV) activity and with the DFSAs who will assist women and youth to 
have secure access to land, a necessary precondition for larger-scale crop production for markets. 

 

Once they are awarded, the Implementer should explore collaboration with USAID’s publicprivate 
partnership activities which may be able to offer services or complementary investments. 
Similarly, the Implementer should partner with USAID programs that seek to strengthen the 
availability of finance in the targeted geographies. M&N can particularly help by creating a 
pipeline of finance applicants and helping financial institutions understand the targeted 
commodities. 

 

In Niger, the Implementer should seek collaboration with USAID’s Youth Connect youth 
livelihood activities, by, for example, helping interested individuals become integrated into 
market networks. In addition, the Implementer will need to partner with USAID’s SHIGA activity 
that will support national-level stakeholder engagement in policy reforms that support resilience, 
such as reforms that benefit the targeted commodities. 

 

Illustrative outcomes on business functioning: 

● Market actors have increased sales and profitability through ongoing business 
relationships 
● Women, youth, poor, and members of marginalized groups are profitably accessing 
markets 
● New jobs are created 
● Producer group members, especially women, are functionally literate 
● Producer groups and other market actors are registered as businesses 
● Producer groups and other market actors have increased sales 
● Market actors regularly use financing to enhance their businesses 



● Market actors are able to assess market opportunities, plan their approach, secure the 
necessary resources or assistance, implement, and then adjust on the basis of how well 
they are achieving their short- and long-term business goals 


 

Illustrative outcomes on sector governance: 

● Established livestock market management committees are strengthened and new 
committees established in new markets 
● Market infrastructure, including sanitation facilities, is improved through local public and 
private investments 
● Women, youth, the poor, and members of marginalized groups actively engage in market 
governance processes 
● Market actors successfully lobby local and national government for supportive 
investments and policies 
● National and local governments adopt policies and procedures that support private sector 
growth in the targeted commodity market systems 
● Policies and capacities are enhanced to better manage the principal risks that can affect the 
selected commodities 
● End-markets are diversified to mitigate currency, price, conflict, and political risks 


 

Result 2: Increased utilization of quality inputs and services 

 

USAID is targeting the services and inputs necessary to achieve the expected results in the chosen 
commodity market systems. Many of these services, however, are also necessary for other 
commodities, and indeed their sustainable provision relies on a diverse customer base. Thus the 
Implementer should take an expansive view in terms of promoting access to these services and 
inputs for a wide variety of customers. In particular, the Implementer should partner with FFP 
DFSAs to ensure inputs and services are extended to their local communities. 

 

USAID will continue to support the inputs targeted under the first phase of RISE: improved seeds, 
fertilizers, animal feed, and Purdue Improved Crop Storage (PICs) bags. Priority services will 
include: veterinary care, business development and support, agricultural/livestock technical 
advice, and market and climate information. Technical advisory services should include helping 
farmers think through their cropping, grazing and land use choices as well as integrated 
approaches to soil fertility management. The Implementer may identify and propose to USAID 
other key inputs or services to be supported. 

 

USAID expects that the Implementer will not only expand access to inputs and services but will 
also support their increased utilization by helping to aggregate demand, lower costs, educate 
consumers, and increase quality. 

 

The Implementer must build on and strengthen groups, businesses, and networks supported by 
REGIS-AG under the first phase of RISE, as well as expand to serve new local market actors in 
RISE II zones covered by FFP DFSAs. Where a group, business, or network was previously 
supported, interventions should focus on increasing profitability, strengthening and formalizing 
relationships, enhancing local ownership, creating linkages to supportive systems, and 
professionalizing/formalizing organizations as registered business entities. 


 

Illustrative nodes of collaboration: 

Groups supported by DFSAs that produce annual crops, livestock, and poultry could all benefit 
from improved services and inputs. The Implementer should also partner with DFSAs on seed 
production because DFSAs often work with local farmer groups to multiply improved seeds for 
their own members and for local re-sale. M&N should help these local seed producers 
professionalize and connect with buyers for their seeds. 

 

Once they are awarded, the Implementer should explore collaboration with USAID’s publicprivate 
partnership activities which may be able to offer services or complementary investments. 
USAID also intends to award complementary activities to enhance financial services (such as 
credit guarantees, incentives, and transaction facilitation), so the Implementer will need to partner 
with them to facilitate access to finance by market actors. The Implementer will also need to 
partner with TEV to enhance access of market actors to climate information services. 

 

In Niger, the Implementer should seek collaboration with USAID youth livelihood activities, by 
for example, helping interested individuals become integrated into market networks. The 
Implementer will also need to partner with SHIGA, a USAID activity that supports national-level 
stakeholder engagement in policy reforms that support resilience, such as reforms to the seed, 
fertilizer and veterinary services sectors. 

 

Illustrative outcomes on agricultural inputs: 

● The quantity of certified seeds available on the market is increased 
● Farmers regularly purchase improved seeds from private seed companies and reputable 
seed producing cooperatives 
● Access to quality livestock feed and fodder is improved 
● Well-labeled, high quality fertilizers and pesticides are available locally in affordable 
quantities 
● Affordable PICs bags of appropriate size and high quality are widely available 
● Women and youth have agricultural inputs-related businesses 
● Local inputs providers are functionally literate 
● Inputs-related businesses have increased sales 
● Inputs-related businesses are registered as businesses 
● Inputs-related businesses regularly use financing to enhance their businesses 
● Inputs-related businesses are able to assess market opportunities, plan their approach, 
secure the necessary resources or assistance, implement, and then adjust on the basis of 
how well they are achieving their short- and long-term business goals. 
● New jobs are created 
● International donors increasingly use a voucher system for farmers to directly purchase 
seeds and fertilizers (USAID will also support this outcome by engaging with other 
donors) 
● National government implements policies that facilitate high quality, competitive, 
inclusive input markets 


 

Illustrative outcomes on services: 

● Poultry and livestock vaccination services are widely utilized 



● Animal mortality and morbidity are reduced 
● Veterinary services businesses are thriving and reaching remote communities 
● Business development service providers are profitable and have regular customers 
● Farmers obtain quality agricultural and land use advice through private providers or 
farmers associations 
● Herders and poultry producers obtain quality livestock advice through veterinary services 
and sectoral associations 
● Market actors have access to sustainably-produced market information 
● Market actors in the targeted commodities have access to climate information services 
● Women and youth are profitably engaged in providing services 
● Local service providers are functionally literate 
● Services businesses have increased sales 
● Services businesses are registered as businesses 
● Services businesses regularly use financing to enhance their businesses 
● Services businesses are able to assess market opportunities, plan their approach, secure the 
necessary resources or assistance, implement, and then adjust on the basis of how well 
they are achieving their short- and long-term business goals 
● National government and local government implement policies and make investments that 
support private sector service delivery 
● New jobs are created 
● Service provider networks have plans and greater capacity to respond to relevant shocks 
and stresses 


 

Result 3: Increased local consumption of nutritious, safe foods 

 

Under RISE II, USAID has a portfolio of interventions supporting enhanced nutrition outcomes, 
an enduring challenge in the arid agro-pastoral zone. M&N’s primary contribution to RISE II 
nutrition outcomes will be to enhance the market availability and local purchase of nutritious, safe 
foods. USAID does not have an a-priori determination of what foods should be promoted as 
nutritious, rather this choice must be grounded in an understanding of local diets. Foods that 
improve the quality of the local diet, that are most likely to improve the nutritional status of the 
target population, and that can be provided through a market-based approach should be 
prioritized. The intent of Result 3 is not to sell nutritious products in urban areas (although that is 
a likely outcome of Result 1), but rather to sell those products in the rural areas where 
malnutrition and poverty are higher. 

 

Using markets to enhance nutrition in rural areas is a relatively unexplored dimension of nutrition 
programming, requiring the Implementer to assess options, pilot, and then scale approaches that 
work. Some piloting and scaling of interventions may be done by M&N alone, whereas others 
may be done in collaboration with other USAID partners. M&N should focus on nutritionsensitive 
behaviors and practices related to improving diets through agriculture market 
interventions. Key practices along nutrition-sensitive impact pathways should be identified, such 
as food safety, storage and consumption. 

 

While the food system will need to be responsive to local dietary needs, cultural preferences, and 
ability to pay, it will also need to build demand for nutritious products. M&N should support 


robust demand-creation rooted in up-to-date social behavior change and marketing approaches. 
M&N’s approach to demand creation should engage food system actors in the process so that they 
understand and can continue the efforts as part of their own marketing actions. These demand 
creation efforts should be consistent with, and complementary to, SBC by other USAID partners. 

 

To achieve Result 3, nutrition programming must be integrated into the activities supporting 
Results 1 and 2. Some ways to incorporate nutrition under Result 1 include: 

● Enhancing storage practices and improving distribution to help smooth seasonal food 
availability 
● Promoting food safety practices and value addition that maintain or enhance the 
nutritional quality of the final product for sale 
● Helping market management committees ensure physical markets are hygienic, promote 
food safety, and provide adequate access to clean water and sanitation services 
● Training and coaching market actors to think about their local markets and what local 
consumers demand – such as simpler, smaller, and cheaper packaging 
● Enhancing literacy of women producers which may result in greater income and voice in 
household-decision making, and more openness to behavior change 
● Improving access to interconnected markets to improve the availability and affordability 
of food, and increased income to spend on items that support nutrition and health 
● Using SBC approaches to influence the dietary practices of the members of producer 
groups to encourage them to consume a portion of their production rather than selling it all 
● Using SBC with members of producer groups to improve food preparation, water storage 
practices, and other essential nutrition actions. 


 

Ways to incorporate nutrition under Result 2 might include: 

● Promoting labor-saving technology that reduces women’s time and energy burdens 
● Mitigating harmful effects of chemical inputs, unsafe water, or other contamination in 
agriculture production or processing reduces the risk of disease, which in turn can lead to 
reduced rates of malnutrition 
● Supporting seed producers and retailers to promote and sell more nutritious varieties, or a 
greater diversity of vegetable seeds. 
● Improving animal sanitation practices that reduce contaminants that contribute to ill-health 
and stunting 


 

Examples of additional market-based nutrition activities include: 

● Facilitating inflows of nutritious products during the lean season, taking care to avoid 
undercutting local producers 
● Supporting production, distribution, and marketing of other nutritious foods beyond those 
in the targeted commodities. As noted below, these will likely be collaborative activities 
with the DFSAs. 


 

To guide nutrition-sensitive interventions under Results 1 and 2, and to identify other impactful 
actions, M&N will need to analyze issues including consumer preferences, buying power, cultural 
constraints, nutritional deficiencies, and pathways to enhancing nutrition. As interventions are 
piloted, the Implementer will need to invest in close monitoring to assess impact and facilitate 
adaptive management. High-level nutrition outcomes, such as stunting, are not appropriate for a 


nutrition-sensitive agriculture market activity to measure. M&N will contribute to high-level 
outcomes, but measurement of those outcomes will not occur at the activity level. Rather, 
population-based surveys on the overall RISE II portfolio will capture high-level nutrition 
outcomes. 

 

Illustrative nodes of collaboration: 

The Implementer will need to work closely with Breakthrough-ACTION (B-A), USAID’s social 
behavior change activity. B-A is cataloging, testing, and developing approaches and tools for 
behavior change in several health areas, including nutrition. M&N can use those standard tools, 
and co-develop new ones with B-A to promote purchase, consumption and other appropriate 
nutrition-sensitive behaviors. 

 

The DFSAs promote the production and consumption of nutritious foods as a core objective and 
they are conducting food security and nutrition analyses to guide their work. While they may 
invest heavily in household production and consumption, they may also support livelihoods that 
enhance food availability in their communities and regions. M&N will need to engage with each 
DFSA individually to understand its theory of change and major investments, and propose how 
M&N can add value to that work through specialized market systems expertise and systems-level 
interventions. For example it could involve helping local producers and processors “take it to the 
next level” of producing at scale for local markets, helping processors develop new products or 
improve quality or safety of their current products, helping them network with like-minded 
producers, linking them to supportive service markets, or enhancing the enabling environment so 
they can grow. 

 

Illustrative outcomes: 

● Animal source foods are available in the local market in smaller quantities at affordable 
prices 
● Enriched processed food products are locally available and affordable 
● Market actors in livestock, poultry, and cowpea sell to local consumers 
● Food producers and processors understand and implement food safety practices 
● Nutritious foods are affordably available during the lean season 
● Producer group members ensure that children and women in their households consume a 
portion of their nutrient-dense commodities rather than selling it all 
● A portion of income earned through market activities is spent on enhancing the nutrition 
of household children 
● Women’s time burden is reduced, allowing her to rest, generate income, and practice 
healthy behaviors 
● Plans and capacities to use private sector food systems in disaster response scenarios are 
enhanced 
● Members of producer groups practice essential nutrition behaviors at home 


 

A list of resources, including existing analyses, background documents, and guidance on good 
practice can be found in Attachment 1. 

 

7. Geographic coverage and target populations 

 


M&N will support investments in Tillaberi, Maradi and Zinder in Niger. Priority M&N 
communes are ones where DFSAs are active under RISE II and where previous REGIS-AG 
beneficiaries are located. Subject to availability of resources, M&N may pursue other 
opportunities within the RISE II and SDP zones. The specific communes to be covered by M&N 
will be jointly agreed with USAID post-award (see Annex #8 for a list of communes of interest, 
including details on REGIS-AG locations that require continued support). Due to security 
situations and other considerations, M&N may have to change geographies during 
implementation in consultation with USAID. 

 

Target populations: 

As a market systems activity, M&N will engage actors throughout the market system, ranging 
from large business owners to the poorest herders. Some of these actors may be located outside 
the RISE II or SDP zones, such as major processors in the capital city or buyers in other 
countries. M&N should work with whichever actors are interested and needed to ensure benefits 
accrue sustainably to the targeted, vulnerable rural populations in the RISE II and SDP zones. 
While RISE II targets the poor and vulnerable, M&N is not expected to work exclusively with 
them, recognizing that a viable market system requires actors at all levels, including large and 
small producers, processors, and traders. The essential point is to implement the RISE II 
operational principle of “Inclusive Targeting” which means that the poor must be included in the 
activity along with all the other important actors. 

 

M&N will need to assess the level of poverty of its beneficiaries, identify specific strategies to 
ensure the engagement and benefit of the poor in its activities, and annually report to USAID the 
numbers of poor who are actively benefiting. Where M&N beneficiaries are shared with DFSA 
partners, they should explore with the DFSA partners how to track shared beneficiaries through a 
unique identifier system. DFSAs will likely take the lead on developing these systems, for 
adoption by others. While ensuring that poor and marginalized social groups benefit from all 
interventions, M&N will also need to find a balanced approach to engaging and benefiting the 
following two core constituencies: 

 

1. Small-holding farmers and agro-pastoralists, especially women 

2. Young men and young women 

 

USAID expects a particular focus on women for two reasons. First, women are systematically 
disadvantaged in Sahelian societies, while at the same time they are important economic and 
social anchors of the household and the community with great potential to enhance development 
outcomes. Second, women are often the most influential in determining household diets and 
ensuring that children are well-fed. By improving the status of women, including their access to, 
and control over resources, we expect improved outcomes for their communities and for their 
children. 

 

M&N should target results for women in several areas: improvements in their capacities, in their 
income, in their access to and control over resources, in their social and organizational status, and 
in their personal health and nutrition. Of particular note, M&N is not meant to work directly on 
children’s nutrition, as there are other partners (notably the DFSAs, Breakthrough-ACTION, and 
Health Services Delivery) who will do so. Rather, M&N is expected to seek to improve the 


nutrition of women market participants with special focus on periods of adolescence, pregnancy, 
post-partum, and lactation. 

 

The second target audience, youth, is important to USAID for two reasons. First, the youth bulge 
provides an opportunity for a demographic dividend if youth get off to a good economic start, and 
become highly productive and socially-minded actors in society. Second, the youth bulge 
constitutes a potential challenge in that dissatisfied youth can be recruited into violent extremist 
organizations and/or criminality in response to economic and social appeals. The second concern 
is particularly important in the SDP zone. As explained in Section 5 above, M&N should 
promote youth engagement in alignment with USAID’s policy and best practices. 

 

8. Activity Monitoring, Evaluating, and Learning Plan (AMELP) 

 

The M&N monitoring, evaluation, and learning system should be based on USAID's 
Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) approach. CLA is predicated on the understanding 
that development efforts yield more effective results if they are coordinated and collaborative, test 
promising approaches, continuously identify new approaches in a rapid yet targeted manner to 
generate improvements and efficiencies, and build on what works and eliminate what does not. 

 

● Collaborating: Facilitating collaboration internally and with external stakeholders to 
promote socio-economic development led by host country governments in response to 
citizen needs and demands; coordinating with other United States Government (USG) 
agencies and USAID Implementing Partners to ensure complementarity and reduce 
overlap, and facilitating joint learning to reduce the collective cost while enhancing shared 
results faster. 
● Learning: Generating and feeding new learning, innovations, and performance information 
back into the activity strategy to inform management, design, policy dialogue 
opportunities and funding allocations; identifying critical knowledge gaps whose answers 
can inform programmatic decisions; creating pauses for reflection within the activity 
implementation scheme, engaging stakeholders for shared ‘learning moments’; conducting 
analytical review of existing and/or new evidence that may support or contradict common 
understanding; and ensuring that the results of this learning are based in community 
experiences and returned to the communities and communes themselves. 
● Adapting: Translating learning (from within the implementation experience or external 
sources) and considering changing conditions, along the lines of the risks, assumptions, 
and game changers, into strategic and programmatic adjustments. This could include 
adjusting work plans to account for contextual shifts or tacit learning from a team’s 
experience, while clearly and explicitly capturing and sharing the rationale for adjustments 
along the way. This should include decisions made by the communities and communes for 
themselves as well. 


 

The AMELP is a tool to organize the CLA process - tracking progress, identifying learning 
opportunities, and adapting programming to anticipate and respond to challenges and 
opportunities that arise. The AMELP must demonstrate how the Implementer will routinely assess 
the quality of data; the status of activities; whether these activities are resulting in their intended 


outcomes; if those outcomes are leading to the desired objectives; whether the theory of change 
and critical assumptions remain valid; and whether course corrections should be made. 

 

The monitoring system must include both performance and context monitoring, utilizing a 
combination of quantitative and qualitative measures. Partners are responsible for collecting 
baseline data for their performance indicators. Performance monitoring refers to monitoring the 
quantity, quality, and timeliness of M&N outputs within the control of the implementer, as well as 
the monitoring of M&N outcomes that are expected to result from the combination of these 
outputs. Performance monitoring includes operational monitoring such as checking back later to 
see if completed interventions still function. 

 

M&N must set targets for, track, and report relevant indicators in a sex- and age-disaggregated 
manner (categories to be determined in consultation with USAID). M&N must also track the 
wealth quintiles of benefitting households to understand the extent to which its activities are 
engaging and benefiting the poor. M&N must also develop a system in collaboration with the 
DFSAs to track M&N engagement with individuals who are also receiving DFSA support. This 
may involve collaboration on the use of unique identifiers established by the DFSA partners. 
Where there are shared beneficiaries, the RISE II Project MELP should clarify how M&N will 
measure its contributions to the joint effort. USAID will engage with all partners as necessary to 
resolve questions of attribution. 

 

Context monitoring is the monitoring of local conditions that may directly affect implementation 
and performance or external factors that may indirectly affect implementation and performance 
(such as macro-economic, social, or political conditions). It improves understanding of activity 
results by placing them in context. Context monitoring should be used to monitor assumptions 
and risks identified in the M&N logic model, and may also be useful as trigger indicators for 
shock response activities. 

 

In order to have a sound monitoring system, Applicants will propose indicators, determine ways 
to set baselines, propose realistic targets (only for performance indicators), and effective 
procedures for internal data quality control. Note, the draft AMELP submitted to USAID with the 
Application must include annual and life-of-project targets for performance indicators. Applicants 
should include Feed the Future indicators as applicable. 

 

USAID will commission a population-based evaluation (to include baseline, midline, and endline) 
of the RISE II project as a whole (to include high-level nutrition outcomes such as stunting). In 
addition, USAID may commission third party performance evaluations of M&N, to include midterm 
and final evaluations. The Implementer shall cooperate with any evaluators as needed. 

 

9. Management and staffing 

 

Collaboration 

Collaboration is essential to the success of the activity, and the M&N Implementer will actively 
collaborate with the Ministry of Agriculture, other relevant government agencies, and key USAID 
Implementing Partners (IP) and other partners working in the same intervention zone. Further, 
M&N Implementers will need to collaborate with each other to share learning about successful 


interventions that may be applicable in the other country context and to work on joint initiatives 
that require cross-border collaboration. In consultation with USAID, this collaboration is expected 
to lead to refinements and adjustments to the Activity’s technical interventions and annual work 
plans. 

 

USAID’s forthcoming Sahel Collaboration and Communication activity will support 
collaboration among RISE II partners and streamline communication for collective impact. 
Partners will be expected to work closely with this mechanism. To facilitate the collaborative 
process, all RISE II activities will be required to do the following: 

 

● Proactively seek opportunities for joint programming that amplifies results; 
● Describe joint activities in annual work plans that clarify roles and responsibilities around 
specific programmatic linkages with other RISE II activities; 
● Conduct joint site visits with other RISE II and SDP partners, when appropriate, to 
facilitate learning across activities; 
● Actively participate in USAID partner meetings and learning events, as well as national 
cluster meetings; 
● Include a section in quarterly and annual reports on collaborative activities and synergistic 
results. 
● Contribute to joint indicators linked to the RISE II results framework, analysis, and the 
diffusion of reliable information in collaboration with other RISE II activities, the 
Government of Niger’s reporting system, and other donors; 
● Seek collaboration with local governments, participate in regional and district planning, 
and share M&N plans with relevant government counterparts. 
● Respond to information requests and taskers coming from USAID's Sahel Collaboration 
and Communications activity. Participate fully and actively in meetings and events 
organized by this activity. 


 

Adaptive management 

Given the shock-prone nature and dynamic operating environments in the Sahel and USAID’s 
need to be responsive to evolving situations, the M&N technical, management, and staffing 
approaches and structures should allow flexibility, responsiveness, and timely course corrections 
when evidence suggests the need for changes. USAID expects a rigorous approach to learning and 
adaptation driven by data that, in consultation with USAID, also leads to refinements and 
adjustments to M&N’s technical interventions and annual work plans. 

 

First six-month refinement period 

During the first six months following award, the Implementer will engage with USAID, partner 
country stakeholders, and relevant IPs to 1) refine its theory of change, approach, and 
interventions, 2) develop plans for initial joint activities with other RISE II and SDP partners and 
partner country stakeholders, 3) begin implementing support for previous REGIS-AG 
beneficiaries, 4) hire and train its staff, 5) collect baseline data for performance indicators, and 6) 
develop its Shock Response Contingency Plan. Three months after award, the applicant must 


submit its full initial AMELP to USAID. No later than five months after award the Implementer 
will submit a revised life-of-project design, the complete first year annual work plan, the Shock 
Response Contingency Plan, and a revised final AMELP to USAID for approval. The Annual 
Work Plan Part 1 (first six months) submitted with the Application must lay out the detailed 
schedule of activities for the six-month refinement period. USAID intends to approve the Annual 
Work Plan Part 1 at the time of award. 

 

Key Personnel and staffing 

Applicants must propose, describe, and justify five Key Personnel positions, of which two are the 
Chief of Party (COP) and Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP). The Application must include 
proposed staff for the COP and DCOP, and as many of the other Key Personnel positions as 
possible. USAID retains the right to request that different positions be named as Key Personnel, 
for a total of no more than five Key Personnel. 

 

The Chief of Party must meet the following minimum requirements: 

 

● At least eight years of experience in senior management of development programs of 
similar or greater scope and complexity; 
● A minimum of a Master’s degree in a relevant subject or a Bachelors degree with an 
additional four years (making 12 years) of relevant technical work experience; 
● Demonstrated leadership, strategic thinking/planning, management, and presentation 
skills; 
● Strong interpersonal and supervision skills managing multicultural and high-performing 
teams; 
● Proven ability to establish close, trusting relationships with IPs, host government officials, 
and other donors; 
● Significant relevant technical experience, preferably in comparable settings; 
● Written and oral French language competency, equivalent to tested FSI R4/S4; and 
● Written and oral English language competency, equivalent to tested FSI R4/S4 - a 
candidate with lower levels of written English skills is acceptable if the proposed staffing 
structure includes a fluent English-language writer available in-country to support 
preparation of documents in English. 


 

The Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) must meet the following minimum requirements: 

 

● At least six years of experience in senior management of development programs of similar 
or greater scope and complexity; 
● A minimum of a Master’s degree in a relevant subject or a Bachelors degree with an 
additional four years (making 10 years) of relevant technical work experience; 
● Demonstrated leadership, strategic thinking/planning, management, and presentation 
skills; 
● Strong interpersonal and supervision skills managing multicultural and high-performing 
teams; 
● Proven ability to establish close, trusting relationships with IPs, host government officials, 
and other donors; 
● Significant relevant technical experience, preferably in comparable settings; 



● Written and oral French language competency, equivalent to tested FSI R4/S4; and 
● Written and oral English language competency, equivalent to tested FSI R4/S4 - a 
candidate with lower levels of written English skills is acceptable if the staffing structure 
includes a fluent English-language writer available in-country to support preparation of 
documents in English. 


 

Recognizing that it can be hard to find specialized expertise locally, the Implementer should have 
at its disposal pre-identified short-term and home office technical experts in key areas, to include 
not only substantive sectoral expertise but also programmatic expertise (e.g. Monitoring and 
Evaluation). 

 

The Implementer must have a well-thought out strategy for ensuring gender, age, and ethnic 
diversity of its staff. Because M&N is promoting enhanced gender and youth engagement in 
markets, the Implementer must take actions to ensure its entire staff is well-versed in gender 
equality and women’s empowerment as well as Positive Youth Development principles and 
approaches. Cultural and attitudinal changes among beneficiaries will be difficult to achieve if 
implementing staff do not themselves understand and value those changes. 

 

Use of local partners 

To the extent possible, the Implementer should seek to utilize Nigerien and/or African 
organizations capable of providing needed technical assistance or other relevant activities through 
the use of sub-grants and/or service contracts. As a market system strengthening activity, the 
mode of delivering assistance should itself strengthen market actors and lead to local capacity to 
support upgrading and diversification of market actors. The Implementer must use comprehensive 
organizational capacity building approaches to strengthen the managerial, financial, and technical 
capacity of these local organizations and firms, and successively empower them to take greater 
roles in M&N implementation. 

 

10. Construction and equipment 

 

Applicants should note that there is a possibility for reprogramming of funds for limited 
construction or infrastructure rehabilitation to achieve the goals of M&N when the need arises, 
and cannot be handled by other means or donors. In such a situation, and consistent with the ADS 
303 guidance on construction, the Applicant will be required to identify the site and submit 
specific details on proposed activities along with budgets, and these will be reviewed and added 
to the award through an amendment to the agreement. Construction must comply with USAID 
requirements on Limitation on Construction under Assistance award pursuant to ADS 303.3.30. 
Implementers are encouraged to consult early with USAID to ensure compliance with USAID 
construction policies and legal requirements and to allow sufficient time to review and concur 
with proposed activities and to process the required Agreement modification. 

 

This may also require an amendment to the Initial Environmental Assessment prior to 
commencing construction activities. The Implementer may need to commission an 
Environmental Impact Assessment and the Implementer will have to demonstrate sufficient 
engineering expertise and construction oversight capacity. 

 


11. Crisis modifier and shock response 

 

Burkina Faso and Niger are subject to covariate shocks and stresses such as droughts, floods, 
insects and diseases, market volatility, price and currency fluctuations, political instability, and 
violent conflict. Because M&N will have experienced staff with local knowledge, relationships, 
and specialized expertise, and because M&N will have a pre-approved Shock Response 
Contingency Plan, M&N will be able to respond to many of these shocks more quickly than a 
new partner could. Similarly, a number of other USAID implementing partners also have the 
award flexibility to help respond to localized or widespread shock events. 

 

M&N crisis response activities will be oriented toward supporting direct M&N beneficiaries who 
may be affected by a shock. In addition, responses could address impacts to the targeted market 
systems, such as through a systems level intervention to address a shock that has wide impacts on 
a value chain. USAID may request the Implementer to address other impacted beneficiaries. 
Both USAID and M&N will monitor shocks and stresses, and either party can initiate a discussion 
about possible use of the crisis modifier. 

 

The $2 million crisis modifier provision in the M&N award, when activated by USAID, 
authorizes the Implementer to incur costs under the activity line item entitled “Crisis Modifier” in 
response to a shock or crisis. Activities to be funded under the crisis modifier are pre-approved 
by USAID through the Shock Response Contingency Plan, which is an addendum to the Annual 
Work Plan. In the event that the shock, or the required shock response, is not included in the preapproved 
Contingency Plan, the Implementer must prepare a concise supplement to the 
Contingency Plan that describes the shock (if it is a new shock), the trigger thresholds, and the 
proposed responses. USAID must approve the revision to the plan prior to authorizing the use of 
the Crisis Modifier. The Crisis Modifier provision is activated upon receipt of a written 
instruction signed by the Agreement Officer stating that “the Crisis Modifier provision is hereby 
activated.” The Crisis Modifier can be activated as many times as is determined appropriate by 
USAID/SRO, subject to the overall $2M level. If greater responses are needed, the Implementer 
may request a budget modification for consideration by USAID. 

 

In case of a shock, the Implementer should first consult with USAID on response possibilities in 
line with the content of the Contingency Plan, and then send a formal request to activate the crisis 
modifier. The request should describe the proposed actions, beneficiaries, geography, and 
timeline, and include the required budget for the response and a “pipeline analysis and 
expenditures forecast” to the end of the fiscal year for the entire M&N activity. This will help to 
determine if additional funds are needed beyond what has already been obligated. The request 
must include two options 1) adding additional funds needed to cover the cost, 2) if additional 
funds are not available from USAID, what currently planned M&N interventions would be 
reduced to free up resources for the response. USAID will respond as to whether additional funds 
are available, and/or what current M&N interventions should be reduced to allow for the 
response. If changes are made to that year’s planned activities, the Implementer must formalize 
the changes by submitting a revised Annual Work Plan within 30 days of the Crisis Modifier 
being approved by USAID. 

 


The Shock Response Contingency Plan must be developed during the 6-month “refinement” 
period of M&N. The Plan must be reviewed each year as part of the annual planning process and 
updated as required. Trigger thresholds for the most significant potential shocks that affect the 
viability of M&N activities will be established in the Contingency Plan. These triggers are meant 
to provide an earlier and more objective indication of when the Implementer and USAID need to 
consider activating the Crisis Modifier. However, the Implementer and USAID can consider 
activating the Crisis Modifier at any time, even if a trigger threshold is not crossed. Design and 
management of contingency plans will be done in consultation with the Office of Foreign Disaster 
Assistance and FFP to ensure coordinated disaster preparedness and response efforts among 
different activities in the region. 

 

If the Crisis Modifier line item is not used, or is not necessary, USAID and the partner may agree 
to expend those resources on other aspects of the M&N Award. The Agreement Officer will 
determine at the time whether this requires an Agreement modification. 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $29,500,000.00 in total USAID funding over a five (5) year period. 

 

The award will include a $2 million set aside for a crisis modifier that allows the Implementer to 
undertake additional early actions or shock response in the event of a projected or current shock. 
The funding anticipated for this award will come from a number of different USAID funding 
streams including agriculture, nutrition, and private sector development. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five years. The estimated start date will be on/or about 
March 2020. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

Award under this NOFO will be a cooperative agreement. Potential applicants should note that 

USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit to the recipients under assistance instruments. 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID will be substantially involved in the implementation of 
this Activity. The intended purpose of the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
involvement during the implementation of the program is to assist the recipient in achieving the 
supported objectives. It is expected that the AO will delegate the following approvals to the AOR: 

 

(a) Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 

USAID will approve annual work plans and the life-of-project exit strategy, and any subsequent 
revisions. 

 

(b) Approval of Specified Key Personnel 

USAID may designate as Key Personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. 

 

(c) Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 

When the Recipient's successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 

USAID's technical knowledge, the AO may authorize the collaboration or joint participation of 
USAID and the Recipient on the program. The AO may include appropriate levels of substantial 
involvement such as the following: 

 

1) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the program 
will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the Recipient. USAID may 
participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees must only deal 
with programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative matters. 


 


2) Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards –including subcontracts to carry 
out work of a technical nature under the award (examples include, carrying out a study or 
a training of a technical nature, etc.). 2 CFR 200.308 already requires the Recipient to 
obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting out of any work 
under an award. This is generally limited to approving work by a third party under the 
agreement. 


 

3) Approval of the Recipient's Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 
(AMELP). 


 

4) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. 


 

(d) Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity 

 The AO may immediately halt construction activity if identified specifications are not met. 

 

An award shall be made only when the Agreement Officer makes a positive determination that the 
Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management competence in 
planning and carrying out assistance programs and that it will practice mutually agreed upon 
methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. For organizations that 
are new to USAID, or organizations with outstanding audit findings, it may be necessary to 
perform a pre-award survey in accordance with ADS 303.3.9 and ADS 591.3.4.2. 

 

4. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937, 
defined as the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. Procurement of 
vehicles and pharmaceuticals and other restricted commodities are subject to the limitations in 22 
CFR 228, ADS 312, and ADS 310 and may require a waiver or Agreement Officer’s approval. 

 

For accurate identification of prohibited sources, please refer to 22 CFR 228 and Automated 

Directive System (ADS) 310 entitled “Source and Nationality Requirements for Procurement of 

Commodities and Services Financed by USAID. 

 

 5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Niger Markets and 
Nutrition Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 
responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective 
administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. The 
Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with 
underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 [END OF SECTION B] 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Qualified U.S. and non-U.S. organizations (other than those from foreign policy restricted 
countries) are eligible to apply under this NOFO. Potential for-profit Applicants should note that, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.400(g), profit, which is any amount in excess of allowable direct 
and indirect costs, is not an allowable cost for Recipients of USAID assistance awards, and cannot 
be part of the activity budget. However, the prohibition against profit does not apply to 
procurement contracts made under the assistance instrument when the Recipient procures goods 
and services in accordance with the Procurement Standards found in 2 CFR 200.317 to 326. 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (possibly including a pre-award survey) by the 
Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective Recipient has the 
necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or 
ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the 
terms and conditions of the award. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

No cost-sharing is required for this award. 

 

3. Program Income 

 

USAID does not anticipate program income under this award. Implementers will need to consult 
with USAID if they generate program income to determine how it should be handled. 

 

4. Other 

Organizations may submit only one application under this NOFO. 

All applications received by the deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness and programmatic 
merit in accordance with the specifications outlined in Section D below. Applications should 
respond directly to the terms, conditions, specifications and provisions of this NOFO (including 
all portions of the program description). Applications that do not meet the requirements of this 

NOFO will not be considered for award. 

[END OF SECTION C] 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Primary: 

Name: Abdullahi Sadiq 

Title: Agreement Specialist 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: asadiq@usaid.gov 

Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

Alternate: 

Name: Chadwick Mills 

Title: Regional Agreement Officer 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: cmills@usaid.gov 

 Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the email address of the 
primary and alternate agency contacts above with a copy to Aminata Diallo at 
amdiallo@usaid.gov and Hamed Cisse at hcisse@usaid.gov no later than the date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Any information given to a prospective Applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an 
amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack 
of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 Name and DUNS number of the organization(s) submitting the application; 



 Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address), clearly identifying if the contact 
person has the authority to negotiate the award, and if not, a person authorized to 
negotiate should also be clearly identified; 


 

 Program name; 


 

 Notice of Funding Opportunity number; and 


 

 Name and DUNS number of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify 
if any of the organizations are local organizations), per USAID’s definition of 
‘local entity’ under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

a) Technical applications may not exceed 25 pages, excluding attachments/annexes, and 
must be on 8.5 by 11 inch or A4 size paper, single spaced, 12-point Times New Roman 
font with one-inch margins on all sides, including consecutive page numbers, date of 
submission, and Applicant’s name on a header or footer.; 


 

b) If applications contain text boxes, they must be in no less than 10-point font, as to not 
unduly interfere with readability; 


 

c) The technical application must be in a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate; 


 

d) The Cover Page, Table of Contents, Acronym list, Executive Summary, and 
Attachment/Annexes do not count against the 25-page limitation. Any page in the 
technical application that contains a table, chart, or graph, not otherwise excluded above, 
is subject to the page limitation; 


 

e) All information from attachments/annexes must be referenced and summarized in the 
technical application and included in the attachment sections. All critical information from 
annexes/attachment that is clearly identified and summarized in the technical application 
will be evaluated as part of the basis of award; 



 

f) Additional documentation beyond the 25-page limit and the required referenced 
annexes/attachments will not be read or evaluated by USAID; 


 

g) Budget Narrative: Accompanying budget notes/narrative must explain the basis of all unit 
costs in each line item. The explanation must identify the factors upon which each 
estimate is based and show the arithmetic in reaching the cost figure; and 


 

h) The budget should be submitted in MS Excel format (software versions 2003 or newer). 
The Excel spreadsheet cells must be “unprotected”, and must not be zipped to allow 
USAID to view all formulas and calculations by line item. See Annex #1 for a sample 
Budget Format. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and the application will not be considered. 
Applicants should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor 
considered. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated 
documentation of delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to the contacts provided in Section D.1. Please do 
not submit applications through the Grants.gov website. Email submissions must include the 
NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application 
sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the 
technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. 
"No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email 
should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, 
Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once 
unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 


Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Senegal Mission cannot 
guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 10MB per email. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The application must contain information that demonstrates the Applicant’s understanding of the 
program description and must be prepared in such a manner as to enable the review committees to 
make a thorough evaluation and arrive at a sound determination of whether the application 
responds to the NOFO. 

 

Unnecessarily elaborate brochures or other presentations beyond those sufficient to present a 
complete and effective application in response to this NOFO are not desired and may be 
construed as an indication of the Applicant’s lack of cost consciousness. Elaborate art work and 
expensive visual or other presentation aids are neither necessary nor wanted. 

 

Format for presentation of technical approach is as follows: 

 

a) Cover Page (does not count toward 25-page limit) 

b) Table of Contents (does not count toward 25-page limit) 

c) Executive Summary (does not count toward 25-page limit) 

d) Technical Approach 

e) Management Approach and Staffing Plan 

f) Organizational Capacity and Experience 

g) Programming in Insecure Zones 

h) Required Annexes (do not count toward 25-page limit): 

Annex 1: Draft Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP) (must not 
exceed 6 pages) 

Annex 2: Six-month Refinement Work Plan 

Annex 3: Organizational Chart 

Annex 4: Staffing Matrix 

Annex 5: CVs/Resumes of Key Personnel (must not exceed 3 pages each) 

Annex 6: Statement of Qualification (maximum 1 page per person) 

Annex 7: Key Personnel Letter of Commitment (maximum 1 page per person) 

Annex 8: Senior Staff Biographies (for non-Key Personnel) 

Annex 9: Letters of Commitment from Sub-Awardees (if any) 


 

a) Cover Page (does not count against the 25-page limit) 


 

See guidance in Section D.3 above for contents of the Cover Page. 

 

b) Table of Contents (does not count against the 25-page limit) 


 

The Table of Contents must include page numbers. 

 

c) Executive Summary (not to exceed 2 pages, does not count against the 25-page 
limit) 


 

The executive summary must describe the basic elements of the technical application. This 
section must include a problem statement, goals and objectives and summarize the key elements 
of the Applicant’s strategy, approach, methodologies, management, personnel and 
implementation plan. 

 

d) Technical Approach 


 

The narrative should describe the proposed technical approach for achieving the M&N goal and 
expected results. It must include a clear description of the conceptual approach—reflecting 
conflict- and nutrition-sensitive market systems facilitation—and general strategy being proposed, 
the expected outcomes and impacts, and the core interventions to implement the strategy. In 
addition, the narrative should describe the following: 

 

● A theory of change that maps out the hypothesized series of changes which are expected 
to occur in a given context as a result of specific interventions and the associated 
assumptions; 


 

● How the approach employs both evidence-based, high-impact interventions and 
innovative market systems and private sector engagement approaches; 


 

● Relevant aspects of the country context and how it is taken into account in the technical 
approach; 


 

● Strategy and specific actions to achieve desired population targeting (as outlined in the 
Program Description Section 7) to include articulation of ambitious but feasible numerical 
targets for numbers or percentages of targeted individuals engaged and directly benefiting; 


 

● Approaches and actions to enhance sustainability and potential scaling of results and 
inclusive impacts; 


 

● How the approach contributes to the RISE II transformative outcomes and applies the 
RISE II operational principles as described in “Section A: Program Description: 
Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE)”; and 


 


● An overview and rationale of the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 
(draft AMELP must be annexed) including the approach to CLA. 


 

The Technical Approach narrative must be supported by the following required Annex: 

 

● Annex 1: Draft Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan as specified in 
“Section A: Program Description: 8. Activity Monitoring, Evaluating and Learning Plan.” 


 

a) Management Approach and Staffing Plan 


 

Applicants should describe their management approach and staffing plan, and how it will enable 
efficient, effective, and inclusive implementation of the proposed technical approach across the 
required geography, taking note of the following instructions: 

 

● Applicants must include a description of how and why they will use full-time staff, shortterm 
assistance including home office support, and consultancies to obtain required 
technical and managerial skills. 


 

● Applicants must include five (5) Key Personnel. A Chief of Party (COP) and Deputy 
Chief of Party (DCOP) are required. Applicants should specify other Key Personnel 
positions according to their technical approach. The Applicant must describe the roles and 
responsibilities of Key Personnel positions, as well as required qualification for each 
position. The Applicant should clearly state which, if any, of the Key Personnel were part 
of the design team responding to this solicitation. The Applicant must state proposed 
candidates for the COP and DCOP, and as many of the other Key Personnel as possible. 
USAID may request an interview with the proposed Chief of Party to inform the selection 
decision. USAID also retains the right, after reviewing the staffing structure proposed by 
the Applicant, to request changes to proposed Key Personnel positions. Key Personnel 
position requirements and qualifications should be included in the annexed Staffing 
Matrix. 


 

● Applicants must discuss how they will build the capacity of their own staff, particularly 
for a market systems approach, as well as how they will enhance functional capacity of 
any local organization partners. 


 

● If sub-awardees are proposed, the Applicant must describe the organizational value-add, 
roles and responsibilities of each, including how they contribute to particular outputs, 
outcomes, results and intended impacts. 


 

● Applicants should discuss their strategy to cover the geographic area, including field 
offices, if any. 


 

● Applicants must demonstrate how they will engage marginalized populations (including 
women and youth) or provide meaningful ongoing insight to design, programming, and 
learning, as part of the management plan. This should also reflect recruitment and 



retention of diverse staff, as well as planned staff capacity building on gender and youth 
empowerment topics. 


 

● Applicants must discuss their adaptive management approach in the context of increasing 
and uncertain levels of insecurity, as well as the need to maintain flexibility in response to 
emerging opportunities and USAID’s needs. 


 

● Applicants should provide a brief overview of their approach to ensure a quick startup and 
complete programmatic refinements, as elaborated in more detail in their proposed Annual 
Work Plan Part 1 - Six-month Refinement Work Plan. 


 

The Management Approach and Staffing Plan narrative should be supported by the following 
Annexes: 

 

● Annex 2: Annual Work Plan Part 1 - Six-month Refinement Work Plan that explains how 
the Applicant will quickly mobilize and begin implementing core activities, while at the 
same time refining the approach and establishing nodes of collaboration with other 
relevant activities. USAID intends to approve this work plan at the time of Award. 
Further details are in “Section A: Program Description: 9. Management and Staffing.” 


 

● Annex 3: Organizational Chart that delineates positions and lines of authority, specifying 
any positions that will be staffed by a sub (if applicable), positions that will be filled by 
expatriates, and position geographic locations. 


 

● Annex 4: Staffing Matrix that includes, at a minimum, the position title, position 
description, required skills and qualifications, geographic location, and proposed 
individual to fill the position if identified. The Staffing matrix should also include 
proposed STTA, either external consultants or home office. Level of effort (% of time) 
should be specified for all positions that are not full-time. 


 

● Annex 5: CVs/Resumes for each proposed Key Personnel, no longer than 3 pages each. 
CVs should include four (4) professional references, including the reference’s name, 
current location, e-mail address, telephone number and description of relationship. USAID 
reserves the right to obtain information on Key Personnel from any and all sources inside 
or outside the US Government. 


 

● Annex 6: Statement of Qualifications (SOQ) for each Key Personnel that clearly 
demonstrates how the proposed individual meets the minimum qualifications for the 
position. The SOQ must also describe the unique attributes of the proposed individual for 
the function s/he will perform. The SOQ must not be a restatement of CVs or 
Resumes. Each SOQ should be no longer than 1 page. 


 

● Annex 7: Key Personnel Signed Letter of Commitment from each proposed Key 
Personnel indicating his/her: (a) availability to serve in the stated position; and, (b) 
intention to serve for a stated term of service. Each should be no longer than 1 page. 


 


● Annex 8: Senior Staff Biographies for members of the senior management team who are 
not Key Personnel (250 words each). 


 

● Annex 9: Sub-Awardee Signed Letter of Commitment (if applicable). Note: given the 
limited numbers of qualified local organizations, USAID requests applicants not to pursue 
exclusive agreements with local partners. 


 

b) Organizational Capacity and Experience 


 

Applicants and their major sub-awardees (if applicable) should describe their organization’s 
experience and capacities (both technical and managerial) as they relate to being able to 
successfully implement M&N. Applicants should clearly specify the scope and complexity of 
prior experiences, and provide sufficient detail to allow USAID to compare those experiences 
with M&N, and to be able to independently verify the Applicant’s performance. Applicants 
should include the project title, years of performance, funder, and funder point of contact for 
experiences referenced. For each experience Applicants must also indicate if they were the Prime 
Awardee or a Sub implementer. These data must be provided in the main text of the technical 
application (in addition to required organizational data for the Cost Proposal). 

 

c) Programming in Insecure Zones 


 

Applicants must provide additional details on how they will adapt their technical approach to be 
effective in insecure zones and how this technical approach addresses drivers of conflict and 
support for violent, extremist organizations. The discussion should reference and respond to the 
specific local contexts of M&N. This is not intended to be a discussion of security measures or 
protocols; such discussion will be considered unresponsive. Security measures and protocols 
should be summarized in the Management Approach section. 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements); 














 

 

 


b) SF 424 Form(s); 














 

The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF- 
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances; 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 


 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 


 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Pre-award Terms Incorporated by Reference: 














 

The following pre-awards terms found in 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mba.pdf are incorporated into 
this NOFO by reference: 

1) Branding Strategy – Assistance; 

2) Marking Plan – Assistance; and 

3) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

 

 

 


e) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must 
contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The Applicant must 
ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as 
Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to 
support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

 Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex #1 for 
Summary Budget Template; 


 

 Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E; and 


 

 Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the Applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 
of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used 
and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the Applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 



superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental 
costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if 
any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, 
condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – Applicants should not budget for construction in their application. The 
successful Awardee may propose to USAID specific construction activities post-Award, along 
with relevant budget re-alignment to be incorporated through an amendment. See Section 
A.10 above for further guidance on construction. 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200.414. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide 
the applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

 


Initial Application Requirements: 

If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved NICRA and the associated 
disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the 
contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a 
provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s 
Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA. 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs, but may not be double 
charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected must be 
used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to 
negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 
200.414(f) for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO. 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

 

Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. 


 

● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one 
program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 


 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

 


f) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
Applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

g) Approval of Subawards 

 

The Applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the Applicant must provide the following: 

 

 Name of organization; 
 DUNS Number; 
 Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list; 
 Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM); 
 Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list; 
 Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred; 
 Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b); and 
 Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

h) Dun and Bradstreet, and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 


 

2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov); 
and 


 

3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 


The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

i) History of Performance 

 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent (not to exceed 3 years) history of 
performance on any cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements (not to 
exceed 5) involving similar or related programs as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
Applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a 
pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

Applicants should use the format provided in Annex #6: Past Performance Information of 
the NOFO to document the detailed information as requested. The completed forms should 
be included in the application’s appendix/annex. 

 

j) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

Branding 

Standard USAID branding and marking will apply to this activity. Branding and marking 
requirements for cooperative agreements are explained in 22 CFR 226. In accordance with the 


requirements discussed in 22 CFR 226 and ADS320, implementing partners will acknowledge 
USAID as M&N’s donor both verbally and in writing in all M&N documents and media, as well 
as during meetings, public events and technical assistance sessions with government stakeholders, 
local partners, and beneficiaries. 

 

Activities under RISE II must refer to themselves as part of the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced 
program in all written and official M&N materials and products. This includes radio and TV 
spots, billboards and other signage, and documents/materials used for any of the following 
audiences: 

● Host country national, regional and local government officials 
● Regional and international donors and/or organizations 
● M&N participants/beneficiaries 
● USAID staff (in host nation countries, regional offices, and Washington DC) 
● Local and international media 
● American public 


 

Acknowledgement that M&N is part of the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced program should 
include the following language: 

The (M&N Name) is part of USAID’s Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced program, which 
supports vulnerable communities in Burkina Faso and Niger to effectively prepare for and 
manage recurrent crises and pursue sustainable pathways out of poverty. 

 

M&N naming 

Activities under USAID’s Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) program should be named in 
a manner that will help all audiences understand the purpose of our work. M&N names should be 
clear, concise, and represent the work of USAID. All RISE II activities will follow USAID 
naming guidance, as noted in the USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding 
Guide. Specifically, RISE II activities should adhere to the following guidelines: 

● M&N names should include a basic description of the project in simple language. 
Activities should use local language names when possible, or in French where a local 
language name is not feasible 
● M&N names should not include abbreviations or acronyms 
● M&N names may include USAID in the name, if appropriate 


 

Branding Strategy 

After technical evaluation of applications for USAID funding, USAID Agreement Officers will 
request Apparently Successful Applicants to submit a Branding Strategy, defined in 22 CFR 
226.2. The proposed Branding Strategy will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement 
Officer shall review for adequacy the proposed Branding Strategy, and will negotiate, approve 
and include the Branding Strategy in the award. Failure to submit or negotiate a Branding 
Strategy within the time specified by the Agreement Officer will make the Apparently Successful 
Applicant ineligible for award. 

 

Marking Plan 

After technical evaluation of applications for USAID funding, USAID Agreement Officers will 
request Apparently Successful Applicants to submit a Marking Plan, defined in 22 CFR 226.2. 


The Marking Plan may include requests for approval of Presumptive Exceptions. All estimated 
costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, labels, banners, 
press events, promotional materials, and the like, must be included in the total cost estimate of the 
grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award, and are subject to revision and 
negotiation with the Agreement Officer upon submission of the Marking Plan. The Marking Plan 
will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement Officer shall review for adequacy the 
proposed Marking Plan, and will negotiate, approve and include the Marking Plan in the award. 
Failure to submit or negotiate a Marking Plan within the time specified by the Agreement Officer 
will make the Apparently Successful Applicant ineligible for award. 

 

Required communications materials 

In addition to a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan, Awardees will be required to submit the 
following communications materials on a timeline specified by USAID, using guidance explained 
in USAID’s Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide and on 
www.usaid.gov/branding. As stated above, all written and/or official communications materials 
will acknowledge the activity’s role in the wider USAID Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced 
program. 

 

A. Within 2 weeks of the award: 
1. Press release - announcement of the award - with feedback from USAID/DOC 


 

B. Within 60 days of the award: 
1. A Communications Strategy submitted and completed with feedback from USAID/DOC 
and revised annually as the program matures 
2. Activity Fact Sheet completed with feedback from USAID, which will be updated 
annually 


 

C. Bi-weekly Updates will include: 
1. Links to media coverage of program and activities 
2. Content for social media, with text and captions for photos 
3. Forecast press events, social media coverage and communication products (newsletter, 
video, etc.). 
4. Event plans (in coordination with the USAID/DOC), with social media tool kit. 
5. Post-event write up and social media analysis with photos 


 

D. Quarterly Reports will include: 
1. One or two success stories submitted with photos (success stories could be submitted also 
at any time) to be edited with USAID/DOC feedback 
2. A pool of selected high-resolution photos showcasing program milestones and 
beneficiaries (all photos with identifiable people will have consent forms signed and 
submitted to USAID). 


 

E. Biannual communications products: 
2. One video (max. 4 minutes) submitted with full involvement of the USAID/DOC – 
including strategizing, storyboarding, script and captions. 
3. Large press event at milestone activities with full involvement of the USAID/DOC. 



 

RISE II communication strategy 

M&N will be expected to contribute to and participate in the implementation of a RISE II 
communication strategy developed jointly with USAID and other RISE II partners. 

 

k) Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be rated by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

USAID intends to award a single Cooperative Agreement from this NOFO. However, USAID 
reserves the right to make more than one award or no award if determined to be in the best 
interest of the Government. Each application submitted compliant with the terms of this NOFO 
will be reviewed according to the process set forth below. 

 

Committee members will examine the logic, feasibility and appropriateness of the technical 
approach, including responsiveness to cross-cutting themes, indicators and anticipated 
development results or impacts; quality and availability of personnel in response to stated 
qualifications or requirements; and several institutional factors. 

 

After evaluations have been completed, the Agreement Officer (AO), considering the SC review 
and the cost evaluation, will then make the final selection. USAID may engage in discussions or 
negotiations with the Apparently Successful Applicant regarding any matter to be covered in the 
final technical and cost application. USAID may also award without further discussions with the 
selected Applicant. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review, using adjectival ratings, of all Applications received that 
comply with the instructions in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in 
accordance with the following criteria shown in descending order of importance. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #1: Technical Approach 

The extent to which the proposed technical approach is tailored to the specific country context 
and can be expected to effectively and efficiently achieve the M&N goal and expected results 
through a nutrition-sensitive market systems approach while contributing to the RISE II 
transformative outcomes, and integrating CLA, inclusion (including for women and youth), and 
conflict sensitivity. 

 

 

 


Evaluation Criteria #2: Key Personnel, Management and Staffing Structure: 

The extent to which the key personnel, staffing and management approach supports effective, 
efficient, and inclusive (e.g., diversity of staffing, engagement of women and youth in 
programming, etc) implementation of the proposed program. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #3: Organizational Capacity and Experience 

The extent to which the Applicant and sub-grantees have demonstrated experience and 
organizational capacity to achieve the Activity goal and expected results. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #4: Programming in Insecure Zones: 

The extent to which the Applicant demonstrates an effective strategy for adapting the technical 
approach in insecure zones and the feasibility of that approach to address drivers of conflict and 
support for violent, extremist organizations. 

 

a) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a preaward 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

These documents may be accessed through the internet as follows: 

 

 2 CFR 200: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 


 

 2 CFR 700: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 


 

 ADS 303: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf 


 

 Standard Provisions for U.S., Nongovernmental Recipients: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303maa.pdf 


 

 Standard Provisions for non-U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mab.pdf 


 

See Section H, Annex #2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to awards 
resulting from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

 Financial Reporting: 


 

The recipient shall account for expenditures for activities carried out to ensure funds are used for 
their intended purposes. Financial reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 200.327. 

 


(a) Quarterly Report: The recipient will submit an SF 425, the Federal Financial Report, via 
electronic format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov) within 30 calendar days following the end of each quarter of the 
United States Government fiscal year. A copy of this form shall be simultaneously submitted to 
the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and the USAID/Senegal Office of Financial 
Management. 

 

(b) Final Report: The recipient will submit within 90 calendar days following the estimated 
completion date of this award the original and three (3) copies of the final Federal Financial 
Reports (SF-425) to: (a) USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMP-LOC Unit; (b) the Agreement 
Officer, (c) Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The electronic version of the final SF 
425 will be submitted to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov) in accordance with paragraph (a) above. 

 

Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ff_report.pdf and 

http://www.forms.gov/bgfPortal/docDetails.do?dId=15149 

 

Line item instructions for completing the SF-425 can be found at: 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ffr_instructions.pdf. 

 

 Performance Reporting 


 

The successful Applicant will provide the following reports, in English, to the USAID Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR) and the Agreement Officer, as specified below, in accordance 
with 2 CFR 220.327 and 220.328. The Recipient will use the standard form Performance Progress 
Report (SF-PPR) to report performance progress for the program under the award. 

 

A. Quarterly Reports 

 

The recipient must submit quarterly reports, covering each calendar quarter, within thirty (30) 
calendar days following the end of each calendar quarter (i.e. January 30, April 30, and July 30), 
limited to ten (10) pages, not including annexes. The report should include the following 
components: 

 

● Bulleted list of achievements in the quarter (1 page) 
● Background and details of some of the key achievements, including potential impacts on 
target populations. Any identified best practices and or lessons learned should be included 
here (4-5 pages) 
● Description of collaborative activities with other USAID implementing partners and/or 
stakeholders (1-2 pages) 
● Description of key problems or issues encountered, how they were or will be resolved, 
and, as needed, recommended USAID interventions to facilitate their timely resolution (1- 
2 pages) 
● Bulleted list of planned activities for the next quarter to include dates and locations of 
major events and meetings (1-2 pages) 



 In addition, the following are required Annexes for the quarterly reports: 

● Annex 1: Table of indicators showing progress made during the quarter, cumulative for 
the fiscal year, and cumulative for the life of project toward set targets. Use a color 
scheme for table highlighting indicators in red if target is not met or to signal that it is in 
danger of not being met and green for indicators met. Provide explanations for targets 
exceeded and targets unmet. 
● Annex 2: Include a financial table which contains expenses of the reported period, year to 
date amount, and remaining budget line item amount. 
● Annex 3: Provide one or two success stories with relevant high resolution photos. Stories 
should highlight the high level impact and/or scalability of the activity's successes. If a 
story could not be done during the reporting period, explain why. (1 page per story) 
● Annex 4: Quarterly Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Report 
● Annex 5: Quarterly Shock Response Contingency Planning Report 


 

 B. Annual Reports 

 

The annual report will consist of both a narrative and a quantitative section and report against all 
indicators. The narrative section is limited to forty (40) pages, not including annexes, and should 
cover key achievements and high level impacts, synergistic results, scalability of results, 
collaborative activities, best practices, lessons learned, challenges encountered, and priorities for 
the next year. Annexes must include: 1) a comprehensive property inventory list; 2) reporting 
against all indicators; 3) financial table; 4) at least one success story with relevant photos; 5) 
Annual Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Report; and 6) Annual Shock Response 
Contingency Plan Report. Annual reports are due 90 calendar days after the reporting period. The 
Annex 2 table for indicators must be submitted on or before October 15th of each year in order to 
be included in USAID's annual performance reporting requirements. For all results that either 
exceed or fall short of the annual target by 10% or more, a narrative explanation must be 
included. Please highlight in a different color all indicators that exceeded (green) or fell short 
(red) of their target so they can be easily distinguished from the rest. The annual report can also 
double as the quarterly report for the final quarter of the reporting period. 

 

C. Final Report 

 

A Final Performance Report is due within ninety (90) calendar days after the completion date of 
the award. The final performance report must be submitted to the AOR and the Agreement 
Officer. The draft final report must be submitted thirty (30) calendar days prior to the completion 
of the award. It is highly recommended that the final report be prepared before the end date of the 
award since additional costs cannot be incurred after the end date. This report should not exceed 
forty (40) pages (excluding annexes). 

 

The report should minimally include: 

● Executive Summary outlining award accomplishments, results, and conclusions as well as 
recommendations for future assistance; 
● Overall description of activities conducted during the life of the Award; 
● Assessment of progress towards Award objectives along with description of results; 
● Description of collaborative activities with other USAID implementing partners; 



● Description of programmatic impact and sustainability; 
● Description of lessons learned and best practices; and 
● Recommendations for future USAID programming. 


 

In addition, a comprehensive property inventory list is required ninety (90) days in advance of 
award completion. 

 

D. Other Reports 

 

Short-Term Consultant and Technical Reports 

USAID expects regular updates from the Implementer with respect to each short-term 
consultancy procured under this award. Upon completion of the services of each short-term 
consultant, the Implementer must submit a short report to the AOR summarizing the activities, 
deliverables, and recommendations of the consultant no later than 21 calendar days after the 
completion of the consultancy. This can be either in written or verbal form as determined by the 
AOR. In addition, the Implementer shall provide copies of all technical reports including 
analyses, policy recommendations, comparative studies, etc. to the AOR once these are 
developed. At the time of procuring consultants or technical assistance providers, the 
Implementer should consult with USAID regarding the need for French-language translations of 
any deliverables. 

 

Geographic Information System (GIS) data 

USAID is required to make nonproprietary geospatial data available to the public. Data must be 
consistent with US Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) level 1 metadata standards. 
USAID is in the process of developing standards and protocols for geospatial-related activities 
with mapping specialists for RISE II. The Implementer will be provided a copy of these 
standards once they are developed and will be required to abide by them. Implementers are 
expected to work in collaboration with these USAID hired mapping specialists and ensure that 
they have mapping capabilities within activity staff or procured through consultants. 

 

All spatial and geographic information system activities financed by USG federal funds must 
comply with: 

a. OMB Circular A-16, Executive Order 12906; 
b. Automated Directives System (ADS) 507 (Freedom of Information Act); 
c. ADS 551 (Data Administration); and 
d. ADS 557 (Public Information). 


 

Therefore, the Implementer must submit to USAID the following one (1) year after the start date 
of the award and on October 30 of each subsequent year: 

 

a. Digital spatial data according to Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) 
Level 1 metadata standards capturing GIS at the regional, administrative, 
commune, and village level for their zones of intervention; 
b. Digital copies of spatial data with accompanying metadata; and 
c. Make spatial data available to the public at the cost of reproduction. 


 


Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) Requirements 

USAID recipients are required to comply with the submission requirements for the Development 
Experience Clearance (http://dec.usaid.gov) pursuant to the Standard Provision entitled 
“Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications (June 2012).” 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR. 

 

Annual Work Plans (AWP) 

The Annual Work Plan will form the basis for activities to be initiated in each year of the award. 
For the purpose of the AWP, “Annual” is defined according to the U.S. Government fiscal year: 
i.e. October 1st to September 30th. Draft AWPs for subsequent years after Year One shall be 
submitted no later than September 1st of each year. The AWP will be reviewed by the AOR 
within two weeks of submission. Following review and comment by USAID, the Implementer 
shall prepare a Final Work Plan for each year, to be submitted no later than October 30th. The 
AWPs will provide a detailed description, schedule, and expected results for activities in support 
of each objective under the award. The Implementer must also address: 

● Any proposed actions to strategically collaborate with other implementing partners incountry 
and cross-border in RISE II and SDP zones 
● How knowledge gaps in the theory of change, the technical implementation approach, 
operating environments, assumptions and risks, will be filled using activities such as, but 
not limited to, monitoring, research, evaluation and analytical studies 
● How specific interventions will be adapted for insecure zones 


 

During the first year of implementation the Annual Work Plan will be submitted in two parts. 
Part 1 is the sixth-month refinement period plan, while Part 2 is the Work Plan for the remainder 
of the year. Part 1 of the Annual Work Plan should also follow the guidelines above for the 
Annual Workplan and it should present the actions the Implementer intends to take during the sixmonth 
refinement period, including a Gantt chart with benchmarks of progress. 

 

Modifications to the AWP may be made during the year subject to the approval of the AOR. 

 

Shock Response Contingency Plan 

The Contingency Plan is an addendum to the Annual Work Plan that outlines the actions the 
Implementer will take in response to shocks and stresses. The Contingency Plan should include 
at a minimum: 

● Description of the major shocks and chronic stresses that may affect M&N program 
performance, undo M&N development gains, and harm direct M&N beneficiaries 
● Interventions/strategies to mitigate ongoing stresses and to reduce risks associated with 
shocks (these interventions should also be included in, and implemented, as part of the 
regular Annual Work Plan) 
● Proposed response and recovery activities for each identified shock 
● Trigger thresholds for context indicators that will be used to determine when a shock may 
be occurring (or will soon occur) that requires a response 
● Indicative unit costs for response options to allow for quick budgeting 


 


RISE II partners and USAID, facilitated by the Sahel Collaboration and Communication activity 
and the Water Security and Resilience activity, will engage in a collaborative process to refine the 
template for Contingency Plans and clarify the coordination mechanisms in case a shock response 
is required. 

 

In the event that the shock, or the required shock response, is not included in the pre-approved 
Contingency Plan, the Implementer must prepare a concise supplement to the Contingency Plan 
that describes the shock (if it is a new shock), the trigger thresholds, and the proposed responses. 
The initial Contingency Plan should be submitted five months after initial award. The 
Contingency Plan must be reviewed each year as part of the annual planning process and updated 
as required. 

 

Close-out Plan 

No later than 180 days before the end of the Award, the Implementer must submit a close-out 
plan that details all equipment and provides a proposed disposition plan according to USAID 
regulations. The Close-out Plan must also specify actions that will be taken to hand over or 
transition activities to other partners, including local communities and governments. The Plan 
must specify sequencing of the closure of offices (if applicable), discuss sequencing of staff 
reductions, and include a communications strategy, activities, and products to highlight M&N 
accomplishments. 

 

4. Environmental compliance and climate risk management 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. The recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this Notice of funding 
Opportunity. 

 

In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. USAID may in addition require environmental reviews 
or mitigation measures that go beyond those required under local law. 

 

No M&N activities funded under this cooperative agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental 
Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation.”) 

 


A Programmatic Initial Environmental Examination (PIEE) has been approved for the RISE II 
project to which this Cooperative Agreement (CA) contributes. The PIEE can be found in the 
Environmental Compliance Database at https://ecd.usaid.gov/document.php?doc_id=51010 . 
Prior to award, USAID will approve the Supplemental IEE specific to M&N and also make it 
publicly available in the same database. The PIEE covers activities expected to be implemented 
under this CA. USAID has determined that a Negative Determination with conditions applies to 
one or more of the proposed activities. This indicates that if these activities are implemented 
subject to the specified conditions, they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the 
environment. The recipient shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to 
activities to be funded under this award. 

 

As part of their initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipients, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and Mission 
Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing 
and planned activities under this CA to determine if they are within the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 


If the Implementer plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 


Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

 

Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental mitigation 
and monitoring plan (EMMP) or a mitigation and monitoring (M&M) plan, the recipients shall 
prepare an EMMP or M&M Plan describing how the recipients will, in specific terms, implement 
all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed HSD interventions within the scope of the 
award. The EMMP or M&M Plan shall include monitoring the implementation of the conditions 
and their effectiveness. 

 

The Implementer shall submit a completed EMMP or M&M Plan within 3 months of Award and 
integrate it into subsequent Annual Work Plans, making any necessary adjustments to M&N 
implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts to the environment. 


Climate Risk Management 

Per ADS 201, a climate risk management (CRM) screening is required for all USAID-supported 
activities, with limited exceptions. Climate risk is the potential for negative consequences on 
activity objectives and/or outcomes due to changing climatic conditions. The focus of climate risk 
management at USAID is on the risk to USAID development programming. The CRM process 
may also identify potential development opportunities associated with current and expected 
climatic and meteorological changes, including chances to achieve additional development 
objectives (including increasing climate resilience and reducing greenhouse gas emissions). 

 


Climate risks can be manifested through potentially severe adverse consequences for development 
programs resulting from the interaction of climate-related hazards with the vulnerability of 
societies and systems. A climate risk may arise when an activity element, target, or beneficiary is 
exposed to a climate hazard such as higher temperatures, flooding or drought. 

 

The level of risk increases both as the severity and probability of negative impact increases. Per 

USAID policy, moderate and high climate risks must be addressed in the activity design and/or 
during implementation. In some cases, the USAID design team may accept a/some risk(s) upon 
consideration of tradeoffs and how USAID can best achieve its development objectives. 

 

A project-level CRM screening analysis was conducted for the entire RISE II Project. An activitylevel 
CRM will also be conducted, during the activity-level environmental analysis process. This 
Activity will be required to incorporate all measures as selected and outlined in the CRM table, to 
be included in the Activity’s Supplemental IEE. 

 

The project-level CRM screening focused on primarily on two climate stressors (i.e., increasing 
temperatures and increasingly variable and unpredictable seasonal rainfall) and two primary 
shocks (i.e., increased flooding and the increased frequency and magnitude of drought). Three of 
these shocks and stresses (i.e., seasonal rainfall, flooding, drought) are related to both climate 
variability and change. The differentiated risks from climate to men, women, and youth need to 
be considered in all interventions. This is especially important as climate shocks and stresses 
(whether direct threats or underlying drivers) will materialize differentially among different 
populations and locations. 

 

Most people in the target zones derive their livelihood from water and rain dependent activities 
(e.g., agricultural, pastoralism), and thus are already at risk from the significant inter-annual 
variation in rainfall that occurs in the Sahel. This risk is likely to be exacerbated by an increase in 
variability and unpredictability. Changing rainfall patterns can act as a both a direct threat and an 
upstream driver of negative impacts in the health sector. For example, rainfall variability affects 
the accessibility of nutritious foods. 

 

Not only is rainfall expected to become more variable and unpredictable, but when rain does fall 
it is expected to do so less often and during extreme events. More rainfall in more limited events 
is likely to lead to increased flooding under some circumstances and in some geographies. Floods 
can wash away cropland, and less frequently, livestock, negatively affecting livelihoods. Floodinduced 
land and crop loss may affect women and youth disproportionately as they are often 
given more marginal lands. Floods can also wash away poorly sited infrastructure (e.g., irrigation, 
storage facilities, roads) that prevent people from being able to access markets as well as RISE II 
implemented trainings and capacity building activities. Such flooding effects are likely to be 
significant, but limited both spatially and temporally. 

 

Increasing temperatures have both near term (e.g., changes in disease burdens, increased heat 
stress) as well as longer-term (e.g., exceedance of crop tolerance thresholds) effects. Where 
appropriate, such impacts are considered within RISE II. For example, the potential shift in the 
viability of certain crops (e.g., maize) and livelihoods (e.g., farming) in some parts of Burkina 
Faso and Niger owing to increasing temperatures needs to be considered in the context of longer- 


term resilience. However, the time frame over which significant changes are likely to happen will 
allow for more opportunity to adapt. Therefore, while it is unlikely that rising temperatures will 
have a large direct impact on RISE II activities, the program seeks to ensure that the systems 
being supported are sustainable and realistic under future climate conditions. 

 

The biggest climate risk to the people living in the target zones, and thus to RISE II, is drought, 
both localized and large-scale. While droughts have, and will continue to, occur periodically 
across the Sahel, most studies suggest their frequency and magnitude are likely to increase. Many 
of these impacts are similar to those discussed under interannual rainfall variability. While RISE 
II envisions improved risk management, even these systems can be overwhelmed by a large 
enough drought or consecutive smaller scale droughts. For example, while social capital is one of 
the most effective means people have to cope with a drought, such capital is limited and can be 
used up during significant events. The most noticeable effects of a drought are those associated 
with the decrease in the productivity of rainfed agriculture and pastoralism (which often drive the 
negative coping mechanisms that lead to increased land degradation). Drought can also act as a 
direct threat to access to finance and insurance. In the face of drought, demand for credit can 
overwhelm institutional capacity in terms of liquidity and ability to assess dynamic risk profiles 
of potential borrowers. Drought can also hinder repayment, further destabilizing credit markets 
and institutions. Drought can also overwhelm poorly designed insurance schemes with too many 
payouts, or damage the credibility of others with not enough payouts or slow timelines to payout. 
While poorly understood, drought is likely to have a significant impact on migratory patterns, 
both temporary and permanent. While pastoralism is a drought risk mitigation strategy that has 
been practiced in the Sahel for generations, the growing realities in both Niger and Burkina Faso 
now limit its effectiveness. Even in good rainfall years some people in target zones have to skip 
meals during the lean season. During droughts a decreased intake of calories can lead to 
significant health problems, and even death. 

 

Climate risks should be adaptively managed during implementation, which should be reflected in 
the activity’s monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) processes. The Activity should, to the 
extent possible and practicable, utilize USAID’s Guide for integrating Climate Risk Management 
in its MEL planning and implementation. USAID’s Guide for integrating Climate Risk 
Management in its MEL planning and implementation can be accessed at 
https://www.climatelinks.org/resources/climate-risk-management-monitoring-evaluationlearning-
and-knowledge-management. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SUMMARY OF REPORTS/DELIVERABLES 

Report 

Due Dates 

Submission 
Requirements 

Annual Work Plan 

Part 1 (first 6 months) 

Submit with the technical application 

Submit electronically with 
technical application 

Revised Program 
Description and/or 
budget (as needed) 

If necessary, as a result of the refinement 
period, the implementer may propose 
changes to the award. Submit 5 months 
after award. 

Submit electronically to AO 
and AOR 

Annual Work Plan 

Part 2 (remainder of 
first fiscal year) 

Submit within 5 months after award 

Submit electronically to AOR 

Shock Response 
Contingency Plan 

Submit within 5 months after award 

Submit electronically to AOR 

Annual Work Plan 
(subsequent years) 

Draft due by September 1st, and final due by 
October 30th 

Submit electronically to AOR 

Environmental 
mitigation and 
monitoring plan 
(EMMP) 

Draft due 3 months after award, final 
version to be integrated in all Annual Work 
Plans and updated as necessary 

Submit electronically to AOR 

AMELP 

Submit abbreviated draft with technical 
application, full draft within 3 months of 
award, and final is due within 5 months after 
award 

Submit draft electronically 
with technical application, and 
final to AOR. 




Branding Strategy 
and Marking Plan 
(BSMP) 

Apparently successful applicant to submit 
BSMP before award. 

 

Within 2 weeks of the award: 

1. Press release - announcement of the award 
- with feedback from USAID/DOC. 

 

Within 60 days of the award: 

1. An activity communications strategy 
submitted and completed with feedback 
from USAID/DOC and revised annually as 
the program matures. 

2. Activity Fact Sheet completed with 
feedback from USAID, which will be 
updated annually. 

Submit BSMP electronically as 
required to Agreement 
Officer, and subsequent 
documents to AOR. 

Short-Term 
Consultant and 
Technical Reports 

• 21 calendar days after the completion of 
the consultancy 

• When completed, submit copies of all 
technical reports including analyses, policy 
recommendations, comparative studies, etc. 

Submit electronically to AOR 

Geographic 
Information System 
(GIS) data 

Submit to USAID the following one (1) year 
after the start date of the award and on 
October 30th of each subsequent year: 

 

• Digital spatial data according to Federal 
Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) Level 
1 metadata standards capturing GIS at the 
regional, administrative, commune, and 
village level for their zones of intervention; 

• Digital copies of spatial data with 
accompanying metadata; and 

• Make spatial data available to the public at 
the cost of reproduction. 

Submit electronically to AOR 




Quarterly reports 
(both financial and 
programmatic) 

30 days after the end of the reporting period 

Submit programmatic report 
electronically to AOR, and 
submit SF 425 to the 
Department of Health and 
Human Services, with a copy 
to AOR and OFM 

Annual report 

To be submitted within ninety (90) calendar 
days following the end of the reporting 
period. 

Submit electronically to AOR 

Close-out Plan 

To be submitted minimum 180-days prior to 
completion date 

Submit electronically to AOR 
and AO 

Final Report 

1. Draft 30 days prior to completion of 
award 

2. Final within 90 days after completion date 

 

Submit a copy electronically to 
AOR and AO, and comply 
with DEC submission 
requirement 



 

5. Other Requirements NA. 


 

[END OF SECTION F] 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

The point of contacts for this NOFO and for any questions during the NOFO process is: 

 

See Section D.1 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

1. Other Information: 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

2. List of Annexes 

 

a) Annex #1: Illustrative Budget Template (Attached Excel File) 
b) Annex #2: Standard Provisions 
c) Annex #3: Abbreviations and Acronyms 
d) Annex #4: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Foreign Registration 
e) Annex #5: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Grantee Registration 
f) Annex #6: Past Performance Information 
g) Annex #7: Resources 
h) Annex #8: List of Communes 


 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 


ANNEXES 

ANNEX #1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 



An Illustrative Budget Template (Excel File) is attached to this NOFO. 








ANNEX #2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 



 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Standard Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. 
The award will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 



REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 



Required 

Not 
Required 



Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA4. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 



No 

RAA5. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



No 

RAA6. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 



No 

RAA7. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 



No 

RAA8. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 



No 

RAA9. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

Yes 



RAA10. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 



No 

RAA11. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

Yes 



RAA12. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA13. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



No 

RAA14. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 



No 

RAA15. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



No 

RAA16. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA17. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 



No 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 



No 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



No 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



No 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 




PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA22. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

Yes 



RAA23. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



No 

RAA24. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (DECEMBER 2014) 



No 

RAA25. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

Yes 



RAA26. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA27. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 



No 

RAA28. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 





REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 





Required 



Not 
Required 



Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA5. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

Yes 



RAA6. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA7. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA8. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA9. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA10. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA11. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA12. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 



No 

RAA13. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 



No 

RAA 14. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 



No 

RAA15. PROGRAM INCOME (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA16. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



No 

RAA17. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 



No 

RAA18. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 




FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 



RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



No 

RAA22. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



No 

RAA23. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 



No 

RAA24. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



No 

RAA25. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



No 

RAA26. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

Yes 



RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 



RAA28. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 



No 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 










ANNEX #3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 



Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan AMELP 

Agreement Officer AO 

Agreement Officer’s Representative AOR 

Alliance Globale pour l'Initiative Résilience au Sahel AGIR 

Automated Directives System ADS 

Breakthrough-ACTION B-A 

Chief of Party COP 

Collaboration, Learning and Adapting CLA 

Civil Society Organization CSO 

Code of Federal Regulations CFR 

Countering Violent Extremism CVE 

Deputy Chief of Party DCOP 

Disaster Risk Reduction DRR 

Democracy, Human rights and Governance DRG 

Development Objective DO 

Development Food and Nutrition Security Activities DFSA 

Food for Peace FFP 

Global Food Security Strategy GFSS 

Government of Burkina Faso GoBF 

Government of Niger GoN 

Health Services Delivery HSD 

Initial Environmental Examination IEE 

Implementing Partner IP 

Millennium Challenge Corporation MCC 

Monitoring and Evaluation M&E 

Market and Nutrition M&N 

Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens 3N 

Non-Governmental Organization NGO 

Notice of Funding Opportunity NOFO 

Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel CILSS 

Public International Organization PIO 

Resilience & Economic Growth in the Sahel - Accelerated Growth REGIS-AG 

Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced II RISE II 

Request for Applications RFA 

Sahel Collaboration and Communication activity SCC 

Sahel Development Partnership SDP 

Sahel Resilience Learning Activity SAREL 

Secrétariat Exécutif du Conseil National de Sécurité Alimentaire SE/CNSA 

United Nations UN 

United Nations Development Program UNDP 

U.S. Department of Agriculture USDA 

United States Government USG 

Violent Extremist Organizations VEO 

Water Security and Resilience WSR 


West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research 

and Development WECARD 

West African Economic and Monetary Union UEMOA 

World Health Organization WHO 

West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research 

and Development CORAF 














































ANNEX #4 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW FOREIGN REGISTRATION 








ANNEX #5 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW GRANTEE REGISTRATION 








ANNEX #6: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION 



1. Award Number: 



2. Contractor/Recipient (Name and Address): 



3. Type of Award: 

4. Complexity of Work: Difficult Routine 

5. Description, location, and relevancy of work: 



6. Dollar Value of Work : Status: Active Completed 



7. Date of Award: 

Award Completion Date (including extensions): _____ 



8. Type and Extent of Subawards: 



9. Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address of the Awarding 
Contracting/Agreement Officer and/or the Contracting/Agreement Officer ’s Representative 
(and other references as applicable): 
























ANNEX #7: RESOURCES 

This list is a sample of resource material; however, it is not exhaustive. 

 Sahel Regional 

● USAID SRO Key Documents website 


https://www.usaid.gov/sahel-regional/newsroom/documents 

● RISE II Technical Approach Working Paper 
https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/usaid-resilience-sahel-enhanced-ii-technicalapproach-
working-paper 




● Summary of RISE gender analysis 


https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/summary-rise-gender-analysis 

● Sahel Youth Analysis 


https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/usaid-sahel-youth-analysis 

● REGIS-AG Cowpea Value Chain and End Market Assessment 


https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/usaid-regis-ag-cowpea-value-chain-and-endmarket-
assessment 

● REGIS-AG Poultry Value Chain and End Market Assessment 


https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1867/usaid-regis-ag-poultry-value-chain-and-endmarket-
assessment 

● REGIS-AG Small Ruminants Value Chain and End Market Assessment 


https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1867/usaid-regis-ag-small-ruminant-value-chain-andend-
market-assessment 

● REGIS-AG mid-term evaluation 


https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00TFQT.pdf 

● RISE mid-term performance assessment (Phases 1 and 2) 


https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/resilience-sahel-enhanced-midterm-performanceassessment-
phase-1 

https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/resilience-sahel-enhanced-midterm-performanceassessment-
efficacy-review 

● Cost-benefit analyses 


https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00TC85.pdf 

Niger 

1. Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) Niger Country Plan: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1867/Niger_Country_Plan_Final_Pub 
lic_Scrub_Clean_WSEdits_8.13.pdf 




2. Climate Change Information and Assessments: 



https://www.climatelinks.org/countries/niger 



3. Drivers of Malnutrition in Niger: Analysis of Secondary Data Sources. USAID 
SPRING. https://www.springnutrition.
org/sites/default/files/publications/briefs/spring_drivers_of_malnutrition_in_nige 
r_0.pdf 




Market Systems 

● USAID Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) Technical Guidance Market Systems and 
Value Chain Programming. https://www.feedthefuture.gov/wpcontent/
uploads/2018/03/GFSS_TechnicalGuidance_MarketSystemsValueChains.pdf 




● A Framework for Inclusive Market System Development. USAID LEO. 


https://www.marketlinks.org/library/framework-inclusive-market-system-development 

● Lessons on Promoting Systemic Change in Shallow Markets. DFAT’s Market 
Development Facility. https://www.marketlinks.org/post/lessons-promoting-systemicchange-
shallow-markets 




● Markets in Conflict Areas. Northeast Nigeria Joint Livelihood And Market Recovery 
Assessment. Mercy Corps. 


https://www.mercycorps.org/sites/default/files/Northeast%20Nigeria%20Joint%20LMRA 
%202017.pdf 

● Value Chain Approach and Conflict-Affected Contexts. 


https://www.marketlinks.org/good-practice-center/value-chain-wiki/value-chainapproach-
conflict-affected-contexts 

● Building Market Systems to Empower Women in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States. 
SEEP Webinar. 

https://seepnetwork.org/Webinar-Post/Building-Market-Systems-to-Empower-Women-in- 
Fragile-and-Conflict-Affected-States-Webinar 

Nutrition 

● Convergence and Tension in Nutrition-Sensitive Agricultural Market Development GFSS 
Activities. USAID Discussion Paper. https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/globalhealth/
nutrition/technical-areas/convergence-and-tension-nutrition-sensitive 




● USAID Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) Technical Guidance Nutrition. 
https://www.feedthefuture.gov/wpcontent/
uploads/2018/03/GFSS_TechnicalGuidance_Nutrition.pdf 




● Designing Effective Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture Activities. USAID SPRING. 
https://www.spring-nutrition.org/publications/training-materials/designing-effectivenutrition-
sensitive-agriculture-activities 





● Understanding the Women’s Empowerment Pathway. USAID SPRING. 
https://www.spring-nutrition.org/publications/briefs/understanding-womensempowerment-
pathway 





