Contents 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 4 
STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT AND THEORY OF CHANGE 6 
Development Hypothesis/Theory of Change 7 
New Partnership Initiative (NPI) 10 
Gender Equality and Female Inclusion 11 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 12 
Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 12 
Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 12 
SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 12 
TITLE TO PROPERTY 13 
AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 13 
Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 13 
Selection of Instrument 13 
Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication 
and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (November 2020) 13 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 14 
Eligible Applicants 14 
Cost Sharing or Matching 14 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 15 
Agency Points of Contact 15 
Questions and Answers 15 
General Content and Form of Application 15 
Preparation of Applications 15 
Application Submission Procedures 16 
Technical Application Format 17 
Cost/Business Application Format 21 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 29 
Criteria 29 
Review and Selection Process 29 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 31 
Federal Award Notices 31 
Administrative & National Policy Requirements 31 
Reporting Requirements 31 
Environmental Compliance 35 
Program Income 36 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 37 
NOFO Points of Contact 37 
Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 37 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 38 
Applications with Proprietary Data 38 
ANNEX 1 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 39 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as amended. 
The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost 
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well 
as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

 

 

 

 

PHILANTHROPY IN ACTION ACTIVITY 

 

 

 

 

PURPOSE 

The goal of the Philanthropy in Action (PA) Activity is to strengthen broad-based participation in 
community development. The purpose of the activity is to increase philanthropic giving in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Furthermore, PA will work in cooperation with other Local Works Activities, and other 
USAID activities, to strengthen social cohesion by mobilizing and empowering connections and solidarity 
among various groups in society. 

 

BACKGROUND 

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country with a long and rich history of philanthropy. Spanning several 
centuries, the culture of philanthropy included numerous endowment funds which were established to 
support diverse societal needs from education; healthcare and human services; arts, culture and humanities; 
and community services, among others. Many of these endowment funds are still active today and this is a 
testament to this rich culture of philanthropic giving. 

 

Today, Bosnia and Herzegovina shows continuous growth in the field of philanthropy. Since 2017, the 
amount of philanthropic donations has increased annually. According to the 2020 National Survey of 
Citizens’ Perceptions (NSPC-BiH)1, the percent of individuals who gave monetary and in-kind donations 
increased to 65% in 2020, compared to 55% in 2019 and 38% in 2018. The 2021 Charities Aid Foundation 
(CAF) World Giving Index ranked BiH 60 out of 114 countries in terms of charitable giving2. This level of 
donation clearly indicates that the potential exists to drive growth in philanthropy from all sectors of BiH 

1 NSPC-BiH is an annual survey conducted by MEASURE II to inform the USAID/BiH’s strategic planning and 
programming (https://measurebih.com/national-survey-of-citizens-perceptions) 

2 CAF World Giving Index (https://www.cafonline.org/about-us/publications/2021-publications/caf-world-givingindex-
2021) 


society. Furthermore, despite the challenges of COVID-19, BiH saw up to $16 million 
3 “Giving BiH - Philanthropy Response to Covid-19”, Catalyst Balkans 
(https://www.slideshare.net/CatalystBalkans/giving-bosnia-and-herzegovina-philanthropys-response-to-covid19- 
july-31-2021) 

4 “BiH daruje - 2020”, Catalyst Balkans (https://givingbalkans.org/bih/content/bih-daruje-2020-report) 

5 Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina (https://www.cbbh.ba/Content/Archive/36?lang=bs) 

 

Group donations (mass giving for appeals and campaigns) make up the largest segment of donors, followed 
by corporate sector donations, and finally those from individual citizens4. BiH diaspora also serve as an 
equally important group of donors giving to BiH citizens and organizations. The Central Bank of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina 2020 Annual Report shows that these donations amount to $1.5 billion dollars5, making 
diaspora contributions a significant portion of the BiH gross domestic product, and also a group which 
could have a great impact on BiH philanthropy, if engaged properly. 

 

In 2020, USAID/BiH conducted a series of meetings with organizations engaged in the philanthropy sector 
in BiH. These meetings highlighted to USAID the opportunities and challenges faced by philanthropic 
organizations in BiH. In general, while the culture of philanthropy is present and growing in BiH, it was 
noticed that there was a lack of systematic giving, where philanthropic actions were mostly spontaneous, 
short-term and driven by specific needs. Visibility was another challenge, since more could be done to 
increase the presence of philanthropy in public life, making the society more aware of what is being done. 
Trust was also noted as one of the challenges, where it was apparent that different stakeholders from 
different sectors do not trust the intentions of others when it comes to their philanthropic activities. 
Ultimately, more can be done to make the process of giving easier by improving the philanthropic 
infrastructure and the cross-sectoral collaboration. 

 

STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT AND THEORY OF CHANGE 

The Philanthropy in Action activity aims to support the BiH philanthropic landscape by increasing 
philanthropic giving from the private sector, citizens and civil society organizations, and the government. 

 

Problem Statement 

The activity seeks to address challenges in the philanthropy landscape in BiH as identified in USAID/BiH 
research. 

 

Based on the research, citizens in general do not trust CSOs, governments or companies in their 
philanthropic interests. One third of respondents to the 2020 NSCP-BiH believe that CSOs mainly advocate 
for their own interests, 29% see them as serving their funders’ interests and close to one fifth believe CSOs 
serve the interest of political parties. Only 15% believe CSOs work for citizens. However, respondents also 
claimed they put their confidence in philanthropic organizations, while many also voiced trust in faithbased 
organizations. The opinions of citizens representatives on the government’s role in philanthropy is 
negative, while also believing that companies, especially the large ones, are mainly driven to philanthropy 
in order to promote their business. Ultimately, however, citizens will engage in philanthropy if they are 


provided with reliable and easy channels of giving and if organizations involved in these activities are 
credible. 

 

CSO representatives do not trust local authorities when it comes to philanthropic activities. They claim 
local governments favor certain CSOs without transparent procedures. Similar to citizens, CSOs believe 
corporate philanthropy is purely used as a marketing tool and not as a sincere act of giving. Furthermore, 
they claim that funds from the corporate sector are insufficiently transparent. 

 

Companies believe that the interest of local authorities in philanthropy is insufficient, and that CSOs have 
difficulties understanding and accepting the role of the corporate sector in philanthropy. Companies receive 
a large number of requests on a daily basis, and are unable to make an informed decision to whom to donate. 
That is why companies usually select CSOs with a strong public profile and choose organizations with 
whom they worked successfully in the past. 

 

As for local authorities, it was not clear whether they are unaware or unwilling to admit that citizens, CSOs 
and companies do not trust them. They believe they have good cooperation with different stakeholders 
through various activities. 

 

Development Hypothesis/Theory of Change 

If trust by the public in philanthropy is improved; 

And if the ease of conducting philanthropic activities is improved, 

Then philanthropic giving in BiH will increase.” 

 

The overall purpose of this activity is to increase philanthropic giving in BiH. 

 
ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION 

The overall goal of this activity is to strengthen broad-based participation in community development. 

 

Sub-purpose 1: Trust by the public in philanthropy improved 

 

Various research has noted that when people know how their donations are being used, they are much more 
likely to engage in giving or volunteering again. As such improving transparency of collected and utilized 
funds is essential for building public trust and contributing to the overall increase in giving. This activity 
will support active philanthropic organizations in BiH by working across different sectors and engaging 
with a wide range of stakeholders by finding creative solutions to make philanthropic giving more 
transparent and accountable. 

 

Expected Results: 

 

1.1 Transparency and accountability of philanthropic organizations in BiH increased. 

1.2 Visibility and promotion of philanthropy in BiH increased. 

 

 


Sub-purpose 2: Ease of conducting philanthropic activities improved. 

 

In order to enable greater giving, efforts must be made to engage a wider set of stakeholders from different 
sectors and to make giving easier through various solutions. Under this sub-purpose, USAID is looking to 
facilitate greater cooperation and engagement of private, public and civil society sectors in philanthropic 
efforts. This activity will seek to develop the capacity of those organizations involved in philanthropy, 
ultimately in order to make the process of giving simpler and make philanthropy activities more systematic. 

 

Expected Results: 

 

2.1 Capacity and performance of organizations implementing philanthropic activities improved. 

2.2 Cross-sectoral collaboration strengthened. 

 

Activity Logframe 

 

 

ACTIVITY LOGFRAME 

LEVEL OF 
RESULT 

NAME OF 
RESULT 

INDICATORS 

DATA 
SOURCE 

ASSUMPTIONS 

Activity Goal 

Broad-based 
participation in 
community 
development 
strengthened 

Number of multistakeholder 
networks and 
partnerships developed 
with LW assistance 

 

Number of local 
stakeholders supported 
by LW assistance 
(financial or in kind, 
businesses, local 
communities, informal 
groups, individuals...) 

 

 

 

 

 

Activity Purpose 

Philanthropic giving 
in BiH increased 

To be proposed by the 
Recipient 

 

 

Activity Subpurpose 
1 

Trust by the public in 
philanthropy 
improved 

To be proposed by the 
Recipient 

 

 

Activity 
Outcome 1.1 

Transparency and 
accountability of 
relevant stakeholders 
increased 

To be proposed by the 
Recipient 

 

 




Activity 
Outcome 1.2 

Visibility and 
promotion of 
philanthropy 
increased 

To be proposed by the 
Recipient. 

 

 

Activity Subpurpose 
2 

Sub-purpose 2: Ease 
of conducting 
philanthropic 
activities improved. 

To be proposed by the 
Recipient. 

 

 

Activity 
Outcome 2.1 

Capacity and 
performance of 
organizations 
implementing 
philanthropic 
activities improved. 

CBLD-9 

 

 

Activity 
Outcome 2.2 

Cross-sectoral 
collaboration 
strengthened. 

To be proposed by the 
recipient. 

 

 



 

COLLABORATION AND COORDINATION 

 

USAID/BiH Local Works Partners 

This activity is designed to be an integral part of the USAID/BiH Local Works portfolio and as such will 
closely collaborate with all other USAID/BiH Local Works activities, as further described below, so as to 
build synergy and find complementary interventions in order to optimize limited resources. 

Improving the Legal Framework for Philanthropy Activity 

This activity, implemented by the Mozaik Foundation, enhances the culture of community philanthropy in 
BiH as a tool towards self-reliance of local development. The activity has two components: cross-sectoral 
collaboration on policy and legal environment of the philanthropy sector in BiH, and legislative advocacy 
which aims to ensure the adoption and implementation of joint proposals for legal, regulatory and policy 
changes. 

 

Network Development Activity 

This activity, implemented by the Network for Building Peace 1) works with local actors, including Local 
Resource Organizations (LRO), community organizations, civic leaders, citizens, private businesses and 
local governments to establish and/or strengthen relationships among actors in a community and between 
communities; 2) facilitates connections among all USAID/BiH Local Works activities; and, 3) improves its 
own network sustainability prospects and strengthening the capacity and cooperation among its 
membership base. 

 

 

Local Resource Organizations (LROs) 

There are currently two LRO activities being implemented, one by the Center for Civic Cooperation (CCC) 
Livno and the other by the Tuzla Community Foundation. The activity implemented by CCC Livno 
involves and brings together different community stakeholders in ten municipalities from southwestern 


Bosnia and Herzegovina, Local Communities, local Non-Governmental Organizations, municipal 

 

The activity implemented by the Tuzla Community Foundation broadens its geographic area of work and 
implements the grant-making and capacity building programs throughout Tuzla Canton. The main goal is 
to mobilize more local resources and encourage more civic leaders and groups to take action and make 
improvements in their communities. 

 

In 2022, USAID plans to expand the pool of USAID supported LROs from two to up to 12 throughout 
BiH, in those geographic areas where current LROs do not operate (current operations are in Tuzla 
Canton and Livno-Grahovo region). The purpose of this is to strengthen the role of LROs throughout 
BiH as hubs of self-reliance in their own communities. 

 

Capacity Development Activity 

This activity, implemented by the Institute for Youth Development KULT, strengthens Local Works civil 
society partners in BiH so that they are more sustainable, effective, integrated, responsive, and accountable 
entities within their respective communities. This support includes processes tailored for organizations to 
build trust in their work with communities, manage and grow their assets and develop operational 
capacities. 

 

This Philanthropy in Action activity will also collaborate with all relevant USAID/BiH activities in order 
to amplify its locally led approach and engagement of all stakeholders (citizens, government and business) 
in community development. These activities include, but are not limited to: Diaspora Invest, Local 
Governance Assistance, and Turizam. 

GUIDING PRINCIPLES 

The following principles must be adhered to: 

Self-Reliance/Sustainability 
USAID’s development approach focuses on building partner countries’ capacities to plan, finance, and 
implement solutions to local development changes, and ensuring that there is a commitment to see these 
solutions through effectively, inclusively, and with accountability. The Local Works program underscores 
USAID’s efforts to advance BiH’s self-reliance through its focus on mobilizing local resources, increasing 
enterprise-driven development, and supporting locally driven initiatives to achieve locally sustainable 
results. The Philanthropy in Action Activity will contribute to BiH self-reliance by mobilizing local 
resources, creating and sustaining an environment that enables both formal and informal groups of 
individuals and organizations to engage in positive change in their communities. Accordingly, sustainability 
of intervention is a key consideration for USAID. The activity expects to build institutional, organization 
and individual philanthropic capacity, to foster partnerships and to introduce tools and mechanisms in a 
manner that these will continue to develop beyond the timeframes and scope of this activity. 

New Partnership Initiative (NPI) 

NPI calls for USAID to work with a more diverse range of partners, strengthen existing partner 


relationships, and provide more entry points for organizations to work with the Agency. NPI seeks to elevate 

Gender Equality and Female Inclusion 

Gender equality and women's empowerment is at the core of development, and USAID is dedicated to 
ensuring gender-inclusive programming and promoting female empowerment and gender equality. For this 
reason, all USAID programs are shaped by a thorough gender analysis, which aims to identify existing 
gender inequities and their causes, identify obstacles to female empowerment, and consider potential 
adverse effects of gender-based exclusion. Pursuant to ADS 205, the results of these gender analyses must 
guide the strategic planning and project design and implementation processes for all USAID projects. In 
addition, the activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan must include appropriate gendersensitive 
indicators and collection of sex-disaggregated data in order to report on gender specific results. 

 

USAID/BiH’s 2019 Gender Analysis6 provides many useful pieces of information on different sectors. It 
found that women in rural areas of BiH are often excluded from public and social life at much higher rates 
than in urban areas. However, it does not provide sufficient data and analysis required for gender integration 
in the implementation of this activity. 

6 USAID/BiH’s 2019 Gender Analysis 

 

Nevertheless, it is important to keep gender balance at both the technical approach and management 
structure of this activity. Data will be collected to better understand how to incorporate gender equality and 
female inclusion in everyday operations as well as philanthropic giving targeting the needs of women and 
girls, in order to enhance the overall philanthropic ecosystem. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION] 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding opportunity. 
Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to provide up to 
$2,000,000 in total USAID funding over a four (4) year period. 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is four (4) years. The estimated start date will be September 1, 2022. 

3. Substantial Involvement 

 

a. Approval of the Recipient's Annual Work Plans. The initial draft Work Plan and subsequent work 
plans must be submitted to and approved by the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) per the 
section F.3.b.2.i. Annual Work Plan with the application. 




 

b. Approval of Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan. Consistent with section 
F.3.b.2.ii, the AOR will review and approve the initial draft MEL Plan and subsequent updates to the 
MEL Plan. As necessary, the MEL Plan may be updated each year of this award as part of the work 
plan approval process. 




 

c. Approval of Specified Key Personnel. The Key Personnel, as a team, must possess fluency in English, 
and the team must possess the following skill sets: 


● Demonstrated experience in managing community development programs including philanthropy; 
● Advanced educational background and knowledge relevant for similar projects/programs 
● Strong leadership, administrative, management, presentation, reporting, and communication skills 
and the ability to implement projects with diverse subject matter; 
● Ability to coordinate with USG and Local Works programs on philanthropy and seek synergies and 
complementarities to maximize results; 
● Ability to perform at a high level and apply diplomacy skills with a wide range of stakeholders 
(i.e., government officials, private sector, NGOs, and beneficiaries); and 
● Candidates would have experience integrating gender equality within philanthropy activities is 
preferred. 


 Replacement of Key Personnel or changes in the Key Personnel positions must have prior 

 approval from the Agreement Officer. 

 

d. Approval of Sub-Awards. Prior approval from the Agreement Officer is required for the sub-award, 
transfer, or contracting-out of any work hereunder, (other than the purchase of supplies, material, 
equipment, or general support services), unless, it was described in the Recipient’s application and 
funded in the approved budget of the award. 




 

e. Direction or Redirection. The AOR may provide directions to the Recipient to help achieve results 
through coordination with other activities sponsored by the U.S. government or other donors, to avoid 
duplication of effort, and/or support U.S. foreign policy considerations. 




 

f. Halt Activity. The AO may immediately halt an activity when identified specifications are 




not met. 


4. Title to Property 

 

Property title under the resultant agreement vests with the Recipient in accordance with 2 CFR 200.313 and 
2 CFR 200.314 for U.S. organizations or the standard provision Title to and Use of Property (DEC 2014) 
for non-U.S. organizations. 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this activity is 937. Code 937 
is defined as U.S., Bosnia and Herzegovina and developing countries other than advanced developing 
countries and excluding prohibited sources. USAID/BiH is open to receiving applications from 
organizations in advanced countries, and if needed, a geographic code 935 (any area or country including 
the cooperating country but excluding foreign policy-restricted countries) waiver for procurement of 
commodities and services may be provided on a case by case basis. 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject activity is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the “Philanthropy in Action Activity” 
which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the activity objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through 
the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering 
Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program description, and the terms and 
conditions of the Federal award. 

7. Selection of Instrument 

 

The purpose of the Philanthropy in Action Activity is to provide technical assistance to increase 
philanthropic giving in BiH and strengthen social cohesion as a key driver of long-term prosperity by 
utilizing locally led development as a key element for BiH’s self-reliance and by mobilizing and 
empowering connection and solidarity song various groups in society. Accordingly, an assistance 
instrument is appropriate given that the principal purpose of the relationship is to transfer a thing of value 
to the State, local government, or other recipients to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation 
authorized by a law of the United States instead of acquiring (by purchase, lease, or barter) property or 
services for the direct benefit or use of the United States Government. 

8. Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and 
Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (November 2020) 

 

USAID has been granted a temporary waiver under Section 889(d)(2) that will allow the recipient to use 
award funds through September 30, 2022, to procure certain telecommunications and video surveillance 
services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR 200.216 for U.S. organizations and the standard provision 
Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (August 2020) 
for non-U.S. organizations. Based on this waiver, all costs incurred for covered telecommunications and 
video surveillance services or equipment will be allowable through September 30, 2022, without regard to 
the standard provision “Allowable Costs” and the cost principle at 2 CFR 200.471. Procurements made on 
or after October 1, 2022, will be unallowable in accordance with the standard provision “Allowable Costs” 
and 2 CFR 200.471. 

 

[End of Special Award Requirement] 

[END OF SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION] 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is restricted to small local, international, and United States-based nongovernmental 
organizations, educational institutions, and other small entities that have received less than a 
total of $5,000,000 from USAID over the previous 5 fiscal years, in accordance with the Localworks 
Legislation (Section 7080 of the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (P.L. 113- 
235). 

 

Furthermore, the applicants are requested to propose no more than two sub-recipients. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from new partners that have not previously received financial assistance 
from USAID. 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

Cost sharing under this activity is strongly encouraged. Such funds may be provided directly by the 
recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors; host governments; and local organizations, 
communities and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities 
at the country level. This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or other facilities 
or equipment which may be used for the activity, provided by the recipient. For guidance on cost sharing 
in grants and cooperative agreements see 2 CFR 200.306. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Points of Contact 

 

Primary: Ms. Sanela Pasanovic 

 Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

 

Secondary: Mr. Patrick E. Robison 

Agreement Officer 

 

Address: USAID/BiH/OAA 

 Robert C. Frasure 1 

 71000 Sarajevo, BiH 

 

Email: ssalkic@usaid.gov 

2. Questions and Answers 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO must be submitted in writing to ssalkic@usaid.gov no later than the date 
and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. 

 

Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all 
other prospective applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting 
applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

3. General Content and Form of Application 

 

Applicants are expected to review, understand and comply with all aspects of the NOFO. Applications 
must be submitted in accordance with the instructions below. 

 

Faxed applications will not be accepted. 

4. Preparation of Applications 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be submitted in 
two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. This subsection 
addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please see Sections D.5 and D.6, 
below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The 
Technical application must address technical aspects only, while the Business (Cost) Application must 
present the costs and address risk and other related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the following 
information: 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the alternate contact 
person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address); 
● Activity name; 
● Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 



● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the organizations are local 
organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 303); and 
● Unique Entity Identifier (SAM) or UEI (SAM). 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the application. 
Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied by evidence of that agent’s 
authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve only as a 
transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part of the merit review 
criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent sections. 
Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman font, 1” margins, 
left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page numbers, date 
of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 12 point 
Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted in 
Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date of September 1, 2022 must be used to prepare the cost application for this 
four-year activity. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no hidden 
formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to the 
Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application submission is the 
unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may be 
considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should retain a copy of 
the application and all enclosures for their records. 

5. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time indicated 
on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. Applicants must 
retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date and 
time/confirmation from the receiving office. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that all necessary 
documentation is complete and received on time. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to ssalkic@usaid.gov.Email submissions must include the NOFO 
number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple 
emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and 
the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost 
application is being sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO 
number], [organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 


USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application into a 
single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how to collate the 
attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic applications if no instructions 
are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email to 
confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, please 
send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name if submitted via 
grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless there has 
been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours occur 
from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in sufficient time 
ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government infrastructure is the 
USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, applicants are 
discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/BiH cannot guarantee their acceptance by the 
internet server. File size must not exceed 25MB. 

6. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application must be specific, complete and presented concisely. The application must 
demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this activity. 
The application must take into account the requirements of the activity and evaluation criteria found in this 
NOFO. 

 

The technical application must not exceed 20 pages consistent with the requirements as set forth below 
and in Sections D.4, D.5, and D.6. 

 

The technical application must include the following sections: 

 

i) Cover Page (not included in the 20-page limit): See Section D.4 above for requirements. 


 

ii) Table of contents (not included in the 20-page limit) 


 

Include major sections of the technical application, with page numbers and attachments. 

 

iii) Executive Summary (included in the 20-page limit; not to exceed 2 pages) 


 

Provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical Application. 

 

iv) Technical 


 

a. Technical Approach (included in the 20-page limit) 


 

Applicants must describe how they plan to increase philanthropic giving in BiH by improving 
public trust in philanthropy and improving the ease of conducting philanthropic activities. 
Applicants are not to merely repeat what is already described in this NOFO but to focus on 
describing the activity that the Applicant will implement and how they propose to achieve the 


expected results and contribute to the overall purpose and sub-purposes as identified in the program 
description. 

 

Applicants are expected to demonstrate an approach reflecting the guiding principles outlined in 
the program description including specific challenges to be addressed, general strategy and plan to 
achieve activity results. Results and the associated impact must be concrete and measurable. 

The program description describes a range of issues that should be addressed in the technical 
approach. It is not meant to describe all of the issues related to philanthropy development nor how 
those issues should be addressed. Therefore, the program description of this NOFO should not be 
interpreted as restrictive. Applicants are encouraged to raise and justify other technical issues that 
may not appear in the program description but are, nevertheless, related. 

 

Applicants must include in their technical approach a clear vision and comprehensive strategy that 
are feasible and sustainable in achieving the results as described in the Section A, Program 
Description. Applicants will be expected to articulate how programming interventions will adapt 
to dynamic and rapidly evolving environments and which learning processes are appropriate to 
ensure the most effective approach and progress toward anticipated results. Proposed approaches 
must reflect a systematic strategy and continuous processes for institutional learning and change, 
which incorporates lessons learned and best practices throughout the program. This includes 
analysis, planning, implementation, assessment, and measurement that are reflected in 
organizational practices of adaptive learning and innovation to ensure they are sustained beyond 
the life of the project cycle. 

 

Accordingly, the technical approach must: 

 

● Demonstrate an in-depth understanding of the programming context. 
● Demonstrate a thorough understanding of the roles and responsibilities of key local, 


national, and regional stakeholders, including government entities and non-profit 

associations, and the private sector. The Applicant should explain how they plan to work 
closely with and use available mechanisms of Local Works activities, as well as other 
USAID/BiH activities (e.g. Diaspora, Local Governance, etc.) to strengthen social cohesion by 
mobilizing and empowering connections and solidarity among various groups in society. 

● Articulate the proposed approach to achieving results, including how the Applicant will 
maintain flexibility and adapt to evolving conditions. 
● Demonstrate clarity and soundness of approach including best practices and lessons learned of 
existing knowledge management platforms. 
● Incorporate gender and sustainability throughout its technical approach. 
● Include a draft Year 1 Work Plan and work plan summaries from Year 2 to Year 5 as further 
described under Annex 2, containing clear timelines, planned activities, major tasks and 
outputs, resource requirements and expected results. The Work Plan should fully illustrate the 
steps which the applicant will take to logically meet the expected results stated in the Program 
Description. 


 

 

b. Management Plan and Organizational Capacity (included in the 20-page limit) 


 

The applicant must demonstrate its sufficient organizational capacity of managing an activity of this scope. 

 

The applicant must propose staffing/teaming structure, describing how it will staff the activity, identifying 
and describing key personnel positions. The applicant must describe an organizational arrangement that 
clearly demonstrates effective means for managing program resources including effective use of local 


resources and working with local partners and organizations. It is USAID’s expectation that key personnel 
will include subject matter experts. However, USAID is open to alternate proposals for the structure of key 
personnel. 

 

This includes: 

 

● Composition and organizational structure of the proposed team. This should include any proposed 
institutional partners (sub-awardees) along with their expertise, roles, and responsibilities; 
● Identify the positions (up to 3) that will be filled by key personnel. For each key personnel position 
briefly highlight why the roles and responsibilities justify the position being designated as 
“key”(see also Annex 3: Job Description for Key Personnel); 
● Management systems and procedures for personnel as well as any proposed sub-awards; and 
● Ways in which the structure will ensure effectiveness and efficiency in order to achieve 


maximum benefits and results at minimum cost. 

 

In addition, the applicant must provide an organogram that has the collective experience and knowledge to 
implement the proposed activity. The applicant must highlight in its staffing plan the chain of command 
among staff for the activity and the location of positions for key personnel. Please also see Section B.3.c. 

 

c. History of Performance (included in the 20-page limit) 


 

An applicant’s history of performance can serve as an indicator of the quality of its future performance. 
This section must address the following: 

 

● Relevant experience with proposed approach. 
● Examples of challenges, problems and corrective actions taken, accomplishments and results in 
developing and implementing similar programs - this should not be just a list of previous programs 
or activities; and 
● Additional information on projects/programs must be included under Annex 4. History of 
Performance. 


 

v) Annexes 


 

Annex 1: Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan (not included in the 20-page 
limit) 

 

The activity MEL is a critical aspect of every USAID activity. In response to this NOFO, applicants will 
submit a draft MEL plan that will describe how the activity will be monitored. The MEL plan must be based 
on the draft Activity Logframe, see Section A: Program Description and adequately capture and mirror the 
proposed technical approach. The applicant must provide a narrative of MEL efforts that clearly describes 
the process of monitoring, evaluating, and learning from implementation to adapt and achieve results. At a 
minimum, the draft MEL will identify baseline data, data sources, frequency of data collection methods, 
the party responsible for data collection, when baseline information will be collected and clear targets. The 
applicant does not need to develop and submit performance indicator reference sheets (PIRS) as part of the 
MEL plan. 

 

The applicant cannot change the result statement at the Purpose level in the logical framework. Minor 
adjustments to sub-purpose results statements are possible. The applicant is at liberty to propose their own 
result statements for the Activity Logical Framework Outcome/Output level. 

 


For the draft MEL plan, the Applicant must propose at least one indicator for the Activity purpose and subpurpose. 
These indicators will become the overall measures of the Activity progress and cannot be output 
indicators (such as number of events held, number of people trained, etc.). The Applicant also must include 
at least one indicator for each outcome/output. 

 

In order to track how effectively USAID assistance contributes to gender equality and female 
empowerment, the MEL plan must include gender-sensitive indicators and sex-disaggregated data. All 
people-level indicators must be sex-disaggregated. It is important that the applicant budgets for all costs 
related to data collection as proposed in the draft MEL plan. 

 

Annex 2: Draft Year 1 Annual Work Plan and brief summaries of Annual Work Plans from Year 2 

to Year 5 (up to 5 pages; not included in the 20-page limit) 

 

Applicants will submit a detailed draft Year 1 Annual Work Plan and brief summaries of annual work plans 
from Year 2 to Year 5. The work plan will include the Applicant’s strategy for a rapid and efficient launch. 
In addition, it must be detailed (narrative, graphic, or both) and sequenced to realistically implement 
proposed interventions/tasks to achieve the results. It must contain clear timelines and resource 
requirements, with each intervention/task clearly linked to an outcome/expected results, planned activities, 
major tasks and outputs, resource requirements and expected results. 

 

Annex 3: Job Descriptions for Key Personnel (up to 6 pages; not included in the 20-page limit) 

 

Job descriptions for key personnel positions must be submitted as an annex to demonstrate how 

the Applicant intends to meet Key Personnel requirements and illustrate the experience and expertise each 
identified Key Personnel position should hold. The job descriptions should highlight the duties, 
responsibilities and required qualifications each key personnel position will have. 

 

Key personnel will not be evaluated as part of this NOFO, and Applicants must not submit CV/resumes 
and other similar documentation related to key personnel. Instead, job descriptions highlighting the roles, 
responsibilities and required qualifications for key personnel must be included as an annex to the 
Application. 

 

After the award is executed, the Recipient will propose a combination of key personnel (up to 3) that 
corresponds to the proposed Program Description, proposed staffing plan and job descriptions. Applicants 
must clearly describe the professional qualifications, education, and relevant experience of its proposed 
Key Personnel. As such, USAID encourages Applicants to begin recruiting for key personnel during the 
application process. 

 

Annex 4: History of Performance (not included in the 20-page limit) 

 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent past performance for all its cost-reimbursement 
contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs during the past five (5) 
years, as follows: 

 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award number; 
● Activity title; 
● A brief description of the work performed; 
● Performance location; 
● Period of performance; 
● Award amount; 



● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three years; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at the 
organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 


USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an applicant’s history of performance 
from any sources and may consider such information in its review of the applicant’s risk. 

7. Cost/Business Application Format 

 

The Cost Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. While no page limit 
exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible while still 
providing the necessary details. The cost application must illustrate the entire period of performance, using 
the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the 
Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. Applicants should not 
submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections: 

 

i) Cover Page (See Section D.4 above for requirements) 


 

ii) SF 424 Forms 


 

The Applicant must sign and submit the SF-424, SF-424A and SF-424B forms. Standard Forms can be 
accessed electronically at https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

iii) Required Certifications and Assurances 


 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with the application: 
“Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the Recipient” document found at 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mav.pdf 

 

iv) Budget and Budget Narrative 


 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) with visible 
formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including itemization of the federal and 
non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets 
with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make an award and may result in a rejection 
of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand 
the proposed costs. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s 
determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by major 
budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any potential subapplicants 
for the entire period of the program in accordance with SF 424 Form budget categories. 



● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to determine that 
the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the applicant’s program and 
are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for any sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out by budget 
category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

Cost-share resources should be distinguished from other resource contributions, including private sector 
resource contributions, if applicable. In addition, all costs including any associated costs as they relate to 
branding and marking as well as MEL efforts must be appropriately budgeted for. 

 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Direct salaries and wages must be proposed in accordance with the 
Applicant's personnel policies and must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, and salary 
escalation factors. Allowances, when proposed, should be broken down by specific type and by 
position. Allowances should be in accordance with the Applicant’s policies and the applicable 
regulations and policies. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The Budget 
Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the services rendered 
and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of the applicant. Applicants must 
provide their established written policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written 
policies do not address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative 
must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 

 

2) Fringe Benefits – If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an agency of the U.S. 
Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an applicant 
does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose a rate and explain how the 
applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown 
comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, 
expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 

 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the trips. Per 
Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel policies. When 
appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, 
and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and 
quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the basis 
for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and 
reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market 
conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the 
property leased. 

 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as the 
applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 

 

6) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 


miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant 
should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their 
relationship to the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 

 

7) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will charge 
all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200. The 
application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable supporting 
information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved 
NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than 
USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s 
discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See 
USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA, the Applicant must submit the following: 

 

● Reviewed Financial Statements Report: a report issued by a Certified Public Account (CPA) 
documenting the review of the financial statements was performed in accordance with Statements 
on Standards for Accounting and Review Services; that management is responsible for the 
preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable 
financial reporting framework and for designing, implementing and maintaining internal control 
relevant to the preparation. The account must also state the he or she is not aware of any material 
modifications that should be made to the financial statements; or 


 

● Audited Financial Statements Report: An auditor issues a report documenting the audit was 
conducted in accordance with Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the financial 


statements are the responsibility of management, provides an opinion that the financial statements 
present fairly in all material respects the financial position of the company and the results of 
operations are in conformity with the applicable financial reporting framework (or issues a qualified 
opinion if the financial statements are not in conformity with the applicable financial reporting 
framework. 

 

8) Cost Sharing – If cost share is proposed, the applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing 
resources to be provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and 
the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. 

 

v) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 


 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for prior 
approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost elements for 
which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the applicant must specify and justify 
that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

vi) Approval of Subawards 



 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time of 
award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● Unique Entity ID/UEI (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign 
Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security design. list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in accordance 
with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for mitigation. 


 

vii) Unique Entity Identifier and SAM Requirements 


 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique entity 
identifier requirements in System for Award Management (SAM). Each applicant (unless the applicant is 
an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or 
(c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide the unique entity entity ID for the applicant and each proposed sub-recipient; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, eliminating 
the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make the process of 
doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during which 
it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a Federal awarding 
agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to begin 
the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by the time USAID is 
ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and 
use that determination as a basis for making an award to another applicant. 

 

viii) Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 


 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan to be 
evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting award. 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding Strategy," 
describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it is promoted and 
communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 
b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 



d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget portion 
of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer 
and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other 
assistance instrument. 
e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, 
stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID logo 
and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the USAID Web site 
at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless the NOFO states that the USAID Administrator has 
approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or with) the 
generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when acknowledging 
contributions. 

 

(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 

 

(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must explain 
how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the program or project. 

 

(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that competes 
with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to consistently identify 
this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. The NOFO will state if 
an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service announcements, 
billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host country 
citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so forth. The applicant 
must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the American People.” 

 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support this 
project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from the host-country government or ministry, including 
any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 


 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and related 
materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if they will 
receive the same prominence as USAID. e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding 
Strategy to ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated 
purpose and results of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. f. 
If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and made 
part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that will 
visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the 
tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency and 
is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. The NOFO will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to the 
applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget portion 
of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer 
and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other 
assistance instrument. 
e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the applicant 
plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, including: 

 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure projects 
or other sites physical in nature; 

 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, public 
service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, media, or 
communications products funded by USAID; 

 

(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief programs; 
and 

 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 

 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, 
fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot be 
displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of the 
American people. 

 


(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 

 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 

 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and 
where the applicant will place the marking; 

 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID Identity, 
and 

 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of why the 
exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking requirements 
would: 

 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The applicant 
must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program goal furthered by 
an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. 
Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 

(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must explain why each 
particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each particular item 
or product is better positioned as a host-country government item or product. 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item or 
commodity would impair its functionality. 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would not 
be cost beneficial or practical. 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must 
identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or otherwise be 
inappropriate. 

(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international law 
violated by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the 
above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated purpose and results of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. g. If the applicant receives 
an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved exemptions, will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, and will apply for the term of the award 
unless provided otherwise. 


 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 


ix) Funding Restrictions 


 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance 
in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit written 
approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that will be 
reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code specified in Section 
B.5 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

x) Conflict of Interest Pre-award Term (August 2018) 


 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 
1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or 
an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 
ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 


 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 


The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware 
of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this 
financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not limited 
to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-public 
information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s 
employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. 
USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification from the 
applicant. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

[END OF SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION] 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 

 

The merit review criteria presented below have been tailored to the requirements of this NOFO. Applicants 
should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which Applicant should address 
in the application and (b) set the standard against which the application will be evaluated. 

 

Recognizing that various approaches may have merit, the award seeks a Recipient that, on the basis of its 
experience, can propose cost-effective ways of implementing this program. USAID may reject the 
application if the response is not deemed sufficiently responsive. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and prescribed by the 
Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a Selection Committee (SC) 
using the criteria as described in Section E.2 below. 

 

● Technical Approach 
● Management Plan and Organizational Capacity 
● History of Performance 


 

2. Review and Selection Process 

 

(i) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit-based review of all applications received that comply with the instructions in 
this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following criteria shown 
in descending order of importance: 

 

a. Technical Approach 


The Technical Approach will be evaluated to the extent to which the Applicant’s narrative convincingly 
demonstrates a reasonable and creative approach that achieves the purpose, sub-purposes and results, 
including collaboration and coordination, and guiding principles identified in this NOFO and the Program 
Description. 

 

b. Management Plan and Organizational Capacity 


Management Structure and Organizational Capacity will be evaluated to the extent to which the 
application’s management structure, staffing plan and organizational capacity convincingly demonstrates 
the ability for effective implementation of the activities proposed and achievement of activity results. 

 

c. History of Performance 


The applicant's past performance information will be evaluated based on the following: how well an 
applicant performed, the relevancy of the work performed under the program, challenges, accomplishment 
and results in developing and implementing programs of similar size and scope. 

 

A lack of recent and relevant past performance will be evaluated as neutral. Prior to assigning a “neutral” 
history of performance rating, the AO may take into account a broad range of information related to an 
applicant’s performance. 

 

 


 

(ii) Cost/Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award as a 
result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the cost 
principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial aspects of the 
program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; (2) whether the 
applicant's plans will achieve the program results with reasonable economy and efficiency; and (3) whether 
any special conditions relating to costs should be included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 
200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. entities, or the 
Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-award survey 
is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient has the necessary 
organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial resources, and technical skills – 
or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the results of the program and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the 
award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

The application with the lowest estimated cost may not be selected if award to a higher priced technical 
application offers a greater overall benefit for the program. All evaluation factors other than cost or price, 
when combined, are significantly more important than cost. However, estimated cost is an important factor 
and the estimated cost to the Government increases in importance as competing applications approach 
equivalence and may become the deciding factor when technical applications are approximately equivalent 
in merit. 

 

 [END OF SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 

 

A notice of award signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document for the award resulting 
from this NOFO. USAID will provide it electronically to the authorized individual identified by the 
Recipient in the application. 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been appropriated, 
allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID anticipates that these 
procedures will be successfully completed, potential Applicants are hereby notified of these requirements 
and conditions for the award. 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as amended. The 
resulting award will be administered in accordance with the following policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 1, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting from this 
NOFO. 

3. Reporting Requirements 

 

The Recipient must provide the following reports to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) as 
specified below, in accordance with 2 CFR 200.328 and 200.327 and the Substantial Involvement 
provisions. 

a. Financial Reporting 


 

Each financial form shall be identified by the appropriate award number. 

 

1. The Recipient is required to prepare and reconcile financial statements on a quarterly basis. 
Accordingly, the Recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a quarterly basis 
within 30 calendar days after the end of each USG fiscal quarter (i.e. October 30, January 30, April 
30, July 30) via electronic format to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), and one copy 
each to the Agreement Officer and the Payment Office at AccountsPayableSarajevo@usaid.gov, 
regardless of the effective date of the Agreement. 


 

The Recipient must submit the final financial report no later than 90 calendar days from the end of 
the agreement. Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: www.grants.gov 

 

2. The Recipient must submit a Standard Form 1034 and SF 270 ‘Request for Advance or 
Reimbursement’ on monthly bases for each upcoming month (30-day period) with the statement 
"Request for Advance" printed at the top of the form, regardless of the effective date of the 
agreement. Or respectively, the Recipient will submit a Request for Reimbursement if for any 



reason it incurred expenditures but did not request or receive any advances yet, or if the Recipient 
received advances, but the expenditures exceeded the aggregate amount of advances previously 
received. In case of the latter, the Request for Reimbursement will not exceed the amount of 
expenditures in excess of the aggregate amount of advances received. 


 

The Recipient is requested to liquidate the advance on a monthly basis. Regardless of the effective 
date of the agreement, the recipient shall submit an SF-1034 (marked "Liquidation of Advances") 
and SF-425 or SF-425a Federal Financial Report to liquidate the advances of the previous month. 
The Recipient must submit the Liquidation of Advances Reports to the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative. 

 

3. The electronic copy of all final financial reports shall be submitted to the Paying Office, the 
Agreement Officer and the Agreement Officer’s Representative no later than 90 calendar days after 
the estimated completion date of this award. 


 

b. Program Reporting and Deliverables 


 

The Recipient will provide below specified documents to the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative 
(AOR), and when requested, to the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

All reports and deliverables must be provided to the AOR in a format to be agreed upon with the AOR. 
Regardless of the start date of the cooperative agreement, all reporting will be adjusted to the USG fiscal 
year calendar. If a justified and timely request is submitted by the Recipient, the AOR may extend the due 
date for the quarterly/annual performance report. 

 

Events may occur between the scheduled performance reporting dates that have significant impact upon the 
supported activity. In such cases, the Recipient must immediately notify the AOR and the AO as soon as 
the following types of conditions become known: 

 

● Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will materially impair the ability to meet the 
objective of the award. This disclosure must include a statement of the action taken, or 
contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve the situation. 
● Favorable developments which enable meeting time schedules and objectives sooner or at less cost 
than anticipated or producing more or different beneficial results than originally planned. 


 

Notifications must include a statement of actions taken and / or any assistance needed to resolve the 
situation. 

 

Web-based Geographic Information System (GIS) – The recipient will submit the Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan and Quarterly Performance Reports with accompanying data on 
performance indicators through USAID/BiH’s web‐based performance management/geographic 
information system, BIHPERFORM. When requested by the AOR, reporting through GIS may include any 
reporting deliverable mentioned below. 

 

1. Program Reporting 


 

i. Quarterly/Annual Performance Reports: The Recipient must submit a performance report to the 
AOR. Quarterly performance reports are due no later than 30 days after the end of each USG fiscal 
quarter (January 30, April 30, July 30). The annual performance report is due 30 days after the end 
of each USG fiscal year (October 30), inclusive of the 4th quarter performance report for that fiscal 



year. At a minimum, the report will contain the following information: 


 

● Data on progress towards achieving results including gender related impact, and 
environmental compliance, 
● Status of activities, 
● Comparison of actual vs. planned accomplishments (as set forth in the work plan), and 
● Discussion of obstacles, constraints and opportunities affecting the project during the 
reporting period along with plans to address these issues during the next reporting period. 
● Reports must also include, as an addendum, any success stories and digital photographs 
that USAID would be able to share with various stakeholders. 




 

ii. Final Performance Report: The Recipient must submit a final performance report to the AOR and 
the Agreement Officer, electronically. In lieu of the last quarterly performance report, the final 
performance report is due 90 calendar days following the end of the completion date of this 
agreement. In addition, one copy of the report shall be submitted to USAID Development 
Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) at http://dec.usaid.gov. The report must summarize major results, 
and discuss progress achieved against the work plan and agreed-upon performance indicators over 
the life of the project. 


 

The Final Report must contain content appropriate for public dissemination. The Final Report will 
contain the following information: 

 

1. An executive summary of the accomplishments and results achieved; 
2. An in-depth analysis of progress and results. This section must clearly describe activities, 
major accomplishments, and results achieved, including results for all of the activities 
under the Cooperative Agreement; 
3. Describe reasons why targets were not achieved or were surpassed and why activities were 
delayed or not carried out, if appropriate; 
4. A summary of problems/obstacles encountered during the implementation, and how those 
obstacles were addressed and overcome, if appropriate; 
5. Success stories, including examples of synergy and collaboration with partners; 
6. Lessons learned, best practices, and other findings, along with recommendations for future 
programming in this sector; 
7. A summary of progress made in achieving indicator targets during the activity 


implementation (based on valid data collection and analysis and credible baseline) 

including final data, compared to baseline data, for all indicators included in the monitoring 
and evaluation plan. This section should include disaggregated data by gender, historically 
disenfranchised groups, and other relevant groups identified; 

8. A comparison of actual expenditures with budget estimates, including analysis and 
explanation of cost overruns or high unit costs, as relevant; 
9. Other pertinent information, including recommendations with in-depth analysis and 
lessons learned, related to the overall activity results; 
10. The Final Report must also contain an index of all reports and information products 
produced under the award; and 
11. The Final Report must include a professionally formatted, four-to eight page annual 
summary of achievements, noteworthy activities, lessons learned, changes in the 
environment, etc. The Report must be formatted to function as a stand-alone, externally 
shareable document, designed to keep key project stakeholders (such as USG agencies, 
other donors, and other USG implementers) up to date on progress. The Final Report must 
include photos, maps, tables, and other graphical elements as relevant. The Final Report 
must not directly recycle text, photos or other elements from Annual Reports. 



 

The final performance report will summarize the country's situation; program highlights, 
achievements, and major activities; problems encountered and how they were solved. Both the final 
performance report and the final financial report should be marked “for internal USAID use only,” 
and must be submitted to the AOR and the Agreement Officer. 

 

iii. Success Stories/Events. USAID's support to Bosnia and Herzegovina is important and the impact 
of its programs should be recognized. The Recipient will provide success stories, when available, 
and keep USAID/BiH informed of events. The success stories/events will be written to reach a 
broad audience, both inside and outside of USAID/BiH, and should be provided in English. Photo 
caption and credit must be included with the success stories/events. 


 

iv. Other Reports: In consultation with the AOR, USAID may require submission of periodic email 
updates on events, achievements, and other successes of the activity. In addition, USAID reserves 
the right to request other forms of reporting as required. 


 

2. Deliverables 


 

i. Annual Work Plan. Within 60 days of award, the Recipient must develop and electronically submit 
the first Annual Work Plan to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). No later than 15 
days from receipt of AOR's comments, the Recipient must submit the revised Work Plan for AOR 
review and approval. 


 

Subsequent Annual Work Plans are due no later than 30 days prior to the end of the USG fiscal 
year. Regardless of the start date of this award, work plans will be adjusted to the USG fiscal year 
of October 1-September 30. Upon acceptance of the work plan by the AOR, any substantial 
revisions to the plan will require written approval from the AOR. 

 

The Recipient must ensure that the annual work plan reflects the activity results and must be within 
the scope of the award. It will serve as a guide for activity implementation, a demonstration of links 
between interventions and results in accordance with the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
(MEL) Plan. It must describe key interventions/tasks to be completed, expected results, quantitative 
targets for all indicators outlined in the AMEL Plan, as relevant, a list of commodities to be 
procured, if any, and key benchmarks to be met throughout the fiscal year. A sub-section with 
details of collaboration with other USAID-funded programs and other donors may also be included, 
as appropriate. The annual work plan will also serve as a basis for budget estimates for that year of 
program implementation. A budget with sufficient detail to allow the AOR to judge the efficiency 
of the implementation plan should be included. 

 

ii. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan. Within 30 days of award, the Recipient must 
submit a draft of Activity logframe and Performance Indicator Summary Sheet7 for the AOR and 
Mission MEL advisor review. The purpose of this step is to have all parties agree on the results and 
targets to be achieved and their corresponding indicators before the Recipients starts drafting a full 
Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (MEL) Plan (Attachment 1). 


7 USAID/BiH Activity MEL Plan template contains standard forms such as the activity logframe and the 
Performance Indicator Summary Sheet for the Recipient to complete. 

8 The Recipient is required to use the USAID/BiH AMEL template. 

 

Within 60 days of award, the Recipient must submit for approval a MEL Plan8 for the life of the 
activity. In consultation with the AOR and the Mission MEL advisor, the MEL Plan will be 


finalized within 90 days after award. The finalized MEL Plan must be approved by the AOR. The 
MEL Plan must be comprehensive to measure impact and progress towards achieving results over 
the life of the award. The MEL Plan must satisfy USAID’s ADS 201 and USAID/BiH’s 
requirements. 

 

The activity will adopt Collaboration, Learning and Adaptability (CLA) in program 
implementation to enable adaptive programming that can respond to changing circumstances, new 
knowledge, and new evidence. The Recipient will be required to integrate CLA into the MEL Plan 
and its implementation to maximize the use of M&E results for course corrections and adjusting 
implementation plans throughout the activity life as deemed appropriate. The Recipient will be 
expected to articulate how interventions will adapt to dynamic and rapidly evolving environments 
and which learning processes are appropriate to ensure the most effective implementation approach 
and continued progress toward anticipated results. Continuous assessments may include, but are 
not limited to, baseline needs assessments, as necessary, for 

contextual variations, as well as capacity assessments for media outlets / institutions / 

organizations. 

 

Data collected under the MEL Plan must be submitted with the final report. Regardless of the start 
date of this award, the MEL Plan will be adjusted to the fiscal calendar of October 1-September 30. 
As necessary, the MEL Plan may be updated each year of this award as part of the work plan 
approval process. 

 

After approval, the plan should evolve as the Recipient learns and adapts during the life of the 
activity. However, targets cannot be changed retroactively and without the AOR’s approval. The 
final version of the plan must be uploaded to an online monitoring system as instructed by the AOR. 

 

The Recipient will be responsible for monitoring of the award. Monitoring and evaluation will be 
a collaborative process with participation of the Recipient, USAID, and the third-party MEL 
contractor. USAID reserves the right to conduct an evaluation at any point during the activity 
implementation. Any USAID-commissioned evaluations of this activity will be covered outside of 
the activity budget and contracted directly by USAID with external sources. 

 

The Recipient is advised to keep the total number of indicators in the MEL plan to a minimum 
necessary to sufficiently measure progress toward achievements. No more than three (3) indicators 
per each result statement from the activity log-frame (result statements are goal, purpose, subpurpose) 
will ensure that the most important indicators are being tracked without overly 
complicating the performance monitoring process. 

 

The Recipient must report on results achieved and corresponding indicators using Activity 
Indicator Performance Tracking Table (Appendix 5 in the MEL plan template) in quarterly/annual 
reports. In order to track how effective USAID assistance contributes to gender equality and female 
empowerment, the MEL plan must include gender-sensitive indicators and sex-disaggregated data. 
All people-level indicators must be sex-disaggregated. 

4. Environmental Compliance 

 

a) The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of USAID’s 
activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include environmental sustainability 
as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate is 
codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System 
(ADS) Chapters 201 and 204 (https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/agency-policy/series-200), 



which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. The applicant’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 


 

b) In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 


 

c) No activity funded under the resulting Cooperative Agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental 
Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation.”) 


 

The Programmatic IEE is supplemented by DCN: 2018-BOS-004 and Amendment to the IEE, 
DCN: 2020-BOS-067 (Attachment 2), to address Localworks activities. It extends environmental 
compliance screening, mitigation, monitoring and reporting requirements established under the 
IEE. The activity qualifies for a Negative Determination with Conditions (having minor to 
moderate adverse impact on the natural and physical environment). 

 

d) As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the Recipient, in 
collaboration with the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and Mission Environmental 
Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned 
activities under this cooperative agreement to determine if they are within the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 


 

e) If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 


 

f) Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written 
approval is received from AOR. 


5. Program Income 

 

USAID does not anticipate any program income under the award. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F – FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION] 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 

 

See Section D for Points of Contact (POC) within USAID while this NOFO is open. 

 

For technical assistance related to Grants.gov, applicants may contact Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via 
email at support@grants.gov. 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all organizations who 
are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for additional information: 
https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G – FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS] 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement Officer is the 
only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. Any award 
and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to 
Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used by the 
U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole 
or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made 
as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have 
the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it 
is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained 
in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of 
this application.” 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H – OTHER INFORMATION] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Require 
d 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

 



 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Require 
d 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 




 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 



 

 

[END OF ANNEX 1 - STANDARD PROVISIONS] 


