Issue Date: September 30, 2022 

Deadline for Questions: October 11, 2022, 9 AM, Tashkent Time 

Closing Date: November 21, 2022, 9 AM, Tashkent Time 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) No. 72012222RFA00001 

Program Title: TB Free Uzbekistan 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the TB Free Uzbekistan activity. Eligibility 
for this award is restricted to qualified U.S. and Non-U.S. non-governmental organizations. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly to 
understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and meet 
eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on www.grants.gov, 
and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check the website to ensure they 
have received the latest information, in its entirety. USAID bears no responsibility for data errors 
resulting from transmission or conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on 
www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or 
via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may only award to an applicant which has complied with all applicable unique entity identifier 
and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D. The registration process 
may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to begin registration early in the 
process. 

 

Please send questions to the points of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for questions is 
shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to all potential 
applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government nor 
commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or submission of questions or an 
application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs 
are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 /s/ 

 

Dana Rose 

Agreement Officer 


 

TABLE OF CONTENT 

 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................. 3 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ............................................................................... 20 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ......................................................................................... 22 

SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION.................................................... 23 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ...................................................................... 38 

SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ............................................ 40 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS ............................................................. 55 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION ................................................................................................... 56 

ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE .................................................................................... 57 

ANNEX 2 – STANDARD PROVISIONS ................................................................................................. 58 

ANNEX 3 – INITIAL ENVIRONMENT EXAMINATION ..................................................................... 61 

ANNEX 4 – LOCAL COMPENSATION PLAN ...................................................................................... 62 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

Goal: Reduce the burden of tuberculosis (TB) in Uzbekistan 

Objective: Achieve 2027 National/ United Nations High Level Meeting (UNHLM) tuberculosis targets 
through optimized reach, cure, prevent and sustain technical area interventions which will expand high 
quality, people-centered, affordable, and integrated TB-related health activities with robust national and 
sub-national health systems. 

 

The TB Free Uzbekistan activity will contribute to the USAID/Uzbekistan’s Strategic Framework and its 
Development Objective 4: Quality, People-Centered, and Integrated Healthcare Provision for Priority 
Disease Threats Expanded, including: 

● Intermediate Result 4.1: Equitable access to affordable disease prevention, detection, and 
treatment services improved. 

● Intermediate Result 4.2: Components of health systems (health workforce, health information 
systems, leadership and governance, and financing) as related to priority disease threats strengthened. 

TB Free Uzbekistan will serve as USAID/Uzbekistan’s flagship activity to support the National TB 
Program (NTP) under the Ministry of Health (MOH) of Uzbekistan. This will be done through two subobjectives 
organized into intermediate results (IR): 

 

Sub-objective 1: SERVICES: Increase the effectiveness of TB prevention, detection, diagnosis, and 
treatment services for all forms of TB 

IR1.1 Increase case detection through targeted screening and active case finding, including contact 
investigations 

IR 1.2. Increase bacteriological and drug-susceptibility testing coverage 

IR 1.3. Increase successful initiation and treatment outcomes for all forms of TB 

IR 1.4. Increase and improve TB preventive treatment and other TB preventive measures 

Sub-objective 2: SYSTEMS: Strengthen TB Health Systems 

IR 2.1 Strengthen governance and management 

IR 2.2 Improve monitoring and evaluation (M&E), including data systems 

IR 2.3 Improve the capacity of human resources within the TB response 

 

PART 1: INTRODUCTION 

 

USAID has provided long-term support for Uzbekistan's healthcare system, including programs to 
combat TB. In 2018, Uzbekistan became an active participant in USAID's Global Accelerator to Stop 
TB. On March 25, 2019, USAID and Uzbekistan's Ministry of Health (MOH) signed a memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) to combat TB. Since Oct 2019, USAID has launched several additional activities 
to fight TB in close partnership with the MOH. 

 

The new TB Free Uzbekistan bilateral activity will continue these joint efforts to reduce the burden of TB 
in the country and will expand high-quality, people-centered, and integrated TB-related health activities 
through equitable access to affordable TB prevention, care, and treatment services and more robust health 
systems to achieve national and UNHLM targets. It will be aligned with the National TB Program's 
(NTP) 2021-2026 National Strategic Plan, USAID's Global TB Accelerator to Stop TB, WHO End TB 
Strategy, and the Global Fund's TB grant agreement. TB Free Uzbekistan will coordinate with existing 
and all TB partners in the country and in the wider Central Asia region. 


 

PART 2: BACKGROUND 

 

While Uzbekistan has been making significant progress in combating TB over the last decade, the disease 
(especially drug-resistant types of TB, or DR-TB) remains one of the country's most pressing public 
health challenges. Uzbekistan is among the world's 30 high burden multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) 
countries. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the country's efforts to combat TB and reversed 
a decade of progress in reducing the TB burden. As a result, about 9,900 TB cases were 'missed' (i.e., not 
detected or reported) in 2020 and 8,500 TB incident cases were 'missed' in 2021. More than 1,100 DRTB 
cases were missed each year in 2020 and 2021. 

 

The pandemic caused the decline in new and relapsed notified drug susceptible TB (DS-TB) cases from 
16,272 cases in 2019 to 12,111 cases in 2020 (26% decline) and the reduction in all notified DS-TB cases 
(previously treated and laboratory-confirmed or clinically diagnosed pulmonary or extrapulmonary cases) 
from 18,744 cases in 2019 to 14,127 cases in 2020 (25% reduction). However, TB case finding is 
recovering presented by preliminary data. In 2021, 13,544 new and relapse TB cases were notified (an 
11% increase compared to 2020). The number of notified DR-TB cases increased in 2021 (2,144) by 
17% compared to 2020 (1,778). 

 

The country needs to consolidate efforts in the next few years on mitigating and learning from COVID- 
19 disruptions, restoring access to and provision of essential TB testing and treatment services to prepandemic 
levels, and getting back on the trajectory to achieve its UN targets committed by the country in 
2018. Additionally, there is a need to update the case detection strategy for children to align with the 
updated WHO guidelines on management of childhood TB, released in March 2022, which include 
recommendations for stool-based TB diagnosis and revised treatment decision algorithms for children 
who remain clinically diagnosed. 

 

According to the WHO, estimated TB incidence in the country has steadily decreased from 101 in 2009 
to 66 in 2020 per 100,000 population. The TB notification rate was reduced from 71 to 42 per 100,000 
population for the same years (2009-2020), but less smoothly with an increase in 2013 and 2019. TB 
mortality decreased in Uzbekistan from 10 in 2009 to 3.2 in 2020 per 100,000 population. The treatment 
coverage rate (notified/estimated cases proportion) reached over 70% in 2019. However, it dropped 
significantly to 55% in 2020 due to the COVID -19 pandemic. In 2021, treatment coverage increased to 
62% (NTP preliminary data); however, still, about 35% of TB cases remain undetected. In 2021, 
Uzbekistan reported 2,144 laboratory-confirmed DR-TB cases, achieving only 60% of the UNHLM 
country target of 3,493. In terms of childhood TB, WHO estimates of TB burden among those under age 
15 (3200) and 2021 notification data for this age group (1733) reveal that almost half (46%) of children 
with TB are missing - either not detected or reported. 

TB Free Uzbekistan will focus on the general population; however, applications should be clear in its 
technical approach in identifying key populations and developing interventions to address their specific 
needs for prevention, detection, and treatment. For example, the activity will ensure that individuals with 
disabilities are taken into consideration when implementing activities aimed at increasing access 
(distance) and awareness of clinical-based services. 

 

The Government of Uzbekistan has adopted comprehensive health reforms, including the National 
Strategy Concept of Healthcare Improvement for 2019-2025, which explicitly outlines TB reduction 
goals. Two presidential decrees prioritize TB services, the Improvement of TB and Pulmonology Services 


(#4191) and Accelerating Pharmaceutical Industry Development. The Ministry of Health and Ministry of 
Finance are addressing health financing reforms to offer: 1) Social Health Insurance and 2) a State- 
Guaranteed Package of Healthcare Services (launched in January 2021). Note that TB Free Uzbekistan 
will not focus on health financing. In January 2022, the MOH and the World Bank held online 
consultations with several experts and representatives of different entities, including NTP's 
representatives, to plan development of Uzbekistan’s new Health Development Strategy 2030. The 
validity of the Presidential decree (#4191) on measures to improve the system for providing specialized 
TB and pulmonological care, which served as a national program, expired in 2021. In March 2022, the 
President of Uzbekistan instructed MOH to develop a new framework for the TB and pulmonology 
governmental program that will be a basis for a new decree. 

Uzbekistan is committed to eliminating TB by 2050. The National TB Strategy (NSP), 2021- 2026, aims 
to reduce the TB incidence rate by 50% and the number of TB deaths by 75% by 2025 (compared with 
2015 levels). NTP aims to achieve UNHLM's TB diagnosis and treatment targets, focusing on DR TB 
patients, childhood TB, and preventive treatment of TB. The NTP's strategic plan is well aligned with the 
USAID's four main technical areas: 

1. Reach: To provide universal access to diagnosis of all forms of TB, including M-XDR TB, 
by promoting the use of rapid molecular tests, including M-XDR TB diagnostics with molecular and 
drug-susceptibility testing (DST) and lab capacity strengthening; 

2. Cure: To ensure access to quality, patient-centered TB services for patients with all forms of 
TB, including innovative out-patient services, shortened regimens, and TB services to reach and treat 
locally defined high-risk groups; 

3. Prevent: To scale up TB infection preventive treatment with intensified contact investigation 
and infection control; and, 

4. Sustainable Systems: To strengthen the country's response to combat TB through 
innovation and health system strengthening, including expanding NTP's capacity in managing all TB 
activities and increasing domestic financing and sustainability for TB services. 

 

LINK TO THE U.S. STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK FOR FOREIGN ASSISTANCE 

 

This activity will coordinate and align with the USAID Global Accelerator to End Tuberculosis, 
announced by USAID Administrator Mark Green at the High-level Meeting on TB of the United Nations 
General Assembly in New York in September 2018. The Accelerator is a new business model designed 
to increase investments from the public and private sectors to end the TB epidemic while simultaneously 
building local ownership and sustainability. It will leverage additional resources from countries, private 
sector partners, and other local organizations to meet the UN targets. It will focus on the countries with a 
high burden of TB in which USAID already has existing partnerships and where the Agency could better 
align with local communities and partners to deliver performance-based results toward the global target. 
This approach ensures USAID is fighting to end TB effectively and efficiently. 

Alignment with the USAID/Uzbekistan Strategic Framework. 

 

The New TB Free Uzbekistan activity will result in the following Intermediate Results (IRs): 

● IR 1: Increased effectiveness of TB prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment services for all 
forms of TB: 

o IR1.1 Increased TB case detection through screening and active case finding, including contact 
investigations 


o IR 1.2. Increased bacteriological and drug-susceptibility testing coverage 

o IR 1.3. Increased successful initiation and treatment outcomes for all forms of TB 

o IR 1.4. Increased and improved TB preventive treatment and other TB preventive measures 

● IR 2: Strengthened TB Health Systems: 

o IR 2.1. Strengthened Governance and Management 

o IR 2.2. Strengthened M&E, HIS, Data Systems 

o IR 2.3. Strengthened Human Resources 

 

These results will achieve the new activity's purpose of expanding high-quality, people-centered, 
affordable, sustainable, and integrated TB-related health activities and reaching UNHLM TB targets in 
Uzbekistan. Finally, it will contribute to the USAID/Uzbekistan Development Objective 4: Quality, 
People-Centered, and Integrated Healthcare Provision for Priority Disease Threats Expanded including: 

 

● Intermediate Result 4.1: Equitable access to affordable disease prevention, detection, and 
treatment services improved. 

● Intermediate Result 4.2: Components of health systems (health workforce, health information 
systems, leadership and governance, and financing) as related to priority disease threats strengthened. 

 

Key Assumptions 

These key assumptions must hold to achieve IRs and to contribute to achieving the activity objectives: 

● A continued collaborative relationship between the Government of Uzbekistan (GOU) and the 
United States Government (USG) 

● Continued MOH support of USAID health programs’ implementation 

● Continued commitment of the GOU to the UNHLM goals in combating TB 

● Continued commitment of the GOU to a gradual increase of domestic funding within next five 
years for essential supplies and medicines funded currently by the Global Fund grant 

● Continued collaboration with major health development partners in the country 

 

USAID AND OTHER DONOR RELATED ACTIVITIES 

Complementarity with other USAID Health Activities 

To support Uzbekistan in achieving the national targets to fight TB and in line with the USAID Strategy 
and Global Accelerator to End TB, USAID will provide technical assistance outlined in the recently 
developed TB Roadmap FY 2022 funds. USAID projects focus on expanding access to accurate TB 
testing and effective treatment, quality patient-centered care, especially for high-risk groups, and 
increasing NTP's capacity for a sustainable and effective response to stop TB in the country. 

 

The New TB Activity will closely coordinate with other USAID activities provided through different 
regional and bilateral projects focused on combating TB in Uzbekistan, including the following activities: 

1. The USAID Eliminating Tuberculosis in Central Asia (USAID ETICA) project, implemented 
by Abt. Associates (regional). The new activity will strengthen the bilateral component of the regional 
flagship activity USAID ETICA, which promotes TB and drug-resistant TB (DR-TB) detection and 
treatment success while improving the enabling environment and financial sustainability of the national 
programs in five Central Asian countries, 

2. The Sustaining Technical and Analytic Resources (STAR) project, implemented by the Public 
Health Institute, has embedded three senior-level TB technical advisors in the Uzbekistan NTP to 


streamline overall program coordination, enhance monitoring and evaluation capacity, and improve 
diagnostic network (bilateral), 

3. The Promoting the Quality of Medicines Plus project, implemented by the U.S. Pharmacopeial 
Convention (USP) (bilateral), 

4. Local Organization Network: The End TB Uzbekistan Project, implemented by the local 
NGO Intilish, aims to increase access to TB diagnostics and treatment for vulnerable groups in Tashkent 
city (bilateral), 

5. The Tuberculosis Implementation Framework Agreement (TIFA) project implemented by 
John Snow Research & Training Institute, Inc. - a key component of the USAID Global Accelerator to 
End TB to support NTP for locally-generated solutions to address the TB diagnosis, treatment, and 
prevention, addressing stigma and discrimination (bilateral), and 

6. The Improved Prevention, Detection, and Treatment of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis 
project in Central Asia, implemented by WHO (regional). 

The new bilateral activity will partner with the local public organization in Uzbekistan to implement 
locally-generated solutions to improve TB diagnosis, treatment, and prevention services focusing on most 
at-risk populations. Partnering directly with local institutions and organizations (civil society 
organization, professional associations, government entities, academia, research, private sector, and 
media) will maximize the potential impact of USAID resources to make sustainable improvements in TB 
services by accelerating the transition to local accountability and ownership. 

 

Other donors and partners supporting TB control efforts in Uzbekistan 

● The Global Fund is one of the largest donors for TB in Uzbekistan. 

In 2020, Uzbekistan's domestic expenditures dedicated to TB activities ($ 69.3 million) were 81.1% of 
the total budget ($ 85.4 million). The Global Fund (GF), a significant multilateral donor, has an 
approximate annual budget of $9.8 million for TB programs. USAID, a lead bilateral donor, supports a 
yearly budget of $6 million for TB. Targeted programming by GIZ, KFW, and MSF equates to a 
combined additional $300,000 annually. 

 

In 2020, USAID supported NTP to develop an NSP for TB and Funding Request to the Global Fund for 
the period of 2021-2024 in the amount of $44.1 million, where $26.1 million was allocated for the TB 
activities. A significant share of the GF grant is dedicated to procuring TB medicines and laboratory 
supplies. Later, in January 2021, MOH placed a $1.6 million order for first- and second-line TB drugs 
from the state budget, using the international mechanism for high-quality TB drugs and diagnostics - 
Global Drug Facility (GDF). Current domestic TB drug procurement is focused on covering all first-line 
drugs (FLD) and 20% of the second-line drug (SLD) supply. In 2021, the budget for TB medications 
increased up to $ 2.2 million, consisting of $ 0.5 million for FLDs and almost $ 1.7 million for SLDs. 
Domestic funding will gradually increase procurement in subsequent years in line with the new 
Governmental TB Program framework. At the same time, GF will decrease procurement funding. 

 

The NTP's TB Technical Working Group and the GF's Country Coordinating Mechanism (CCM) TB 
stakeholders group meet regularly. USAID-embedded NTP advisors help to facilitate the TB Technical 
Working Group. They also participate in bi-monthly donor coordination meetings. The Global Fund 
CCM coordinates and ensures complementary support for the NTP and HIV programs. USAID regularly 
provides leadership and technical inputs to NTP and GF's activities, advocates for TB activities 
sustainability, and offers technical assistance to implement NSP. 


● Medecins San Frontieres supports NTP in implementing TB control activities in Karakalpakstan 
Autonomous Republic and Tashkent city. 

PART 3: THEORY OF CHANGE 

The "TB Free Uzbekistan" Activity's theory of change is centered around cross-sectoral change to 
address root causes and key barriers to eliminating tuberculosis (TB) by creating a sustainable ecosystem 
of strengths and opportunities for Uzbekistan. Evidence-driven solutions with USAID TB Accelerator's 
to Stop TB technical areas (Reach, Cure, Prevent and Sustain) will lead to resilient and vibrant 
communities free of TB. The new activity will build on the existing strengths of the national TB program 
to accomplish lasting change through proven approaches to stop spreading the disease, including 
activities to interrupt TB transmission in communities, scaling up preventive interventions, increasing TB 
case finding and notifications, and ensuring all people with TB complete treatment stop spreading the 
disease. These interventions will be underpinned by a strengthened, more resilient and sustainable health 
system to address the main social drivers of the TB epidemic in Uzbekistan. A multiplier effect of 
strengthening future public health pandemic preparedness and readiness will be achieved by supporting 
the country's platforms and models for effective and equitable TB service delivery. 

 

IF TB case notification, curative and preventive treatment initiation and completion rates increase, 
accompanied by systems strengthening to sustainably increase the quality of TB service delivery, THEN 
it will contribute to achieving the national targets and reducing the burden of TB in Uzbekistan, and 
quality TB service delivery at the national level will be maintained. 

 

PART 4: PROPOSED OUTCOMES AND RESULTS 

 

ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION COMPONENTS 

 

This new bilateral TB activity operational content will build around technical areas reflected in the 
FY2022 TB Roadmap for Uzbekistan as part of the USAID's Global Accelerator to End TB. Specifically, 
under the REACH technical domain, the new activity will improve TB detection, screening, and testing 
via the TB diagnostics network and laboratory capabilities, increase the involvement of all care providers 
and strengthen community engagement, and scale up contact investigation activities. This domain will 
include updates to case detection strategies among children per WHO recommendations. The activity will 
tackle barriers to treatment success of all forms of TB as part of the CURE technical area. Within the 
PREVENT field, the core strategy will advance preventive treatment for PLHIV, children and adult 
contacts, and infection prevention and control. In the SUSTAIN technical area, the main activity will 
increase self-reliance by improving NTP's management capacities, programmatic efficiency, and 
mobilizing domestic resources for a stronger TB and DR-TB response. 

 

 

The overall activity will have a goal of reducing the burden of TB in Uzbekistan with a prioritized focus 
placed on building the leadership, management, financing, and technical capacities of health institutions, 
communities, and civil society to reach, prevent, detect and successfully treat all forms of TB. TB Free 
Uzbekistan will build the capacity of health systems and services to better prevent, detect, notify and 
initiate TB treatment. 

 

GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE 

 


Regions for implementation will be determined by the successful applicant in the work planning 
development stage, with approval by the Agreement Officer’s Representative. This will be done in 
cooperation with NTP leadership. 

 

Sub-objective 1: Increase effectiveness of TB prevention, detection, diagnosis, and 
treatment services for all forms of TB 

 

IR 1.1 Increase TB case detection through screening and active case finding, including contact 
investigations 

 

Primary health care (PHC) providers are the leading players in improving TB case finding and access to 
TB services. Unfortunately, some PHC doctors have outdated knowledge of diagnostic protocols, 
leading to delayed TB diagnosis and treatment. Doctors in PHC facilities are not consistently utilizing 
rapid molecular tests for TB (Xpert). Rather, often they refer patients for X-rays and smear microscopy 
tests and only after positive results refer a patient to the TB specialist. Low PHC providers' motivation 
results from inefficient incentives, a part of the ongoing healthcare financing reforms. Inadequate 
transportation coverage, quality, and specimen collection frequency are other main barriers to 
increasing TB case finding. Another barrier to improving connectivity between available TB services 
and communities is the limited number of NGOs and community organizations working on reducing the 
TB burden and stigma. 

 

USAID engaged with CSOs, other community players, and relevant healthcare system entities to 
improve case finding and strengthen coordination in contact investigation. USAID organized advocacy 
workshops in project sites with local partners, including centers of healthy lifestyles, TB centers, MoH 
branches in the Community and Family Committees, religious organizations, local authorities to 
improve collaboration for increasing TB detection among vulnerable groups such as potential and 
recently returned labor migrants, PLHIV, and household contacts of individuals with active TB disease. 
To address TB stigma and discrimination in TB, USAID trained journalists and used social networks to 
disseminate information about TB symptoms and treatment, resulting in more than 100 publications on 
TB issues. USAID also conducted a gender study to identify gender and other social barriers among 
target groups and measured the stigma associated with TB. The study results informed the design of 
activity interventions, including information and awareness campaigns. 

 

There are still several persistent barriers to increasing TB case finding outside healthcare facilities, such 
as a limited number of NGOs working on TB issues, overall low community engagement in finding TB 
cases, limited health education about TB at the community level, and a persistent strong presence of TB 
stigma. CSOs can play a more prominent role in delivering community-based detection services of TB 
among household contacts and high-risk groups. The activity will identify opportunities to address 
stigma and gender barriers associated with TB among medical professionals and work with communities 
to better understand and address the social and cultural determinants influencing the TB response in 
Uzbekistan. Engagement with traditional and community leaders will determine ways to increase 
community-participation in supporting TB clients in the community setting. 

 

 Illustrative activities in communities: 

 

• Active case finding (ACF) (i.e. TB screening activities outside of health facilities, outreach to 
vulnerable and marginalized populations); 


● General public education, population-based advocacy campaigns, and other efforts in social and 
behavior change communication (SBCC); 

● Screening of populations, including the key populations identified by the applicant; 

● Measurement of TB stigma and interventions to alleviate such stigma; and 

● Address gender-based differences in access to health information by including targeted 
community-based activities. 

 

Illustrative activities in primary health care and facility-based TB case identification: 

 

1. Increasing facility-based case finding: 

● FAST (Find cases Actively, Separate safely, and Treat effectively); 

● Facility-based quality improvement; 

● Reporting improvements; and 

● Specific TB collaborative activities with other programs (e.g. intensified case finding (ICF) in 
diabetes, and nutrition clinics. This activity may include introduction of screening and referral strategies 
from pediatricians and other providers who care for children. 

2. Engagement of non-NTP providers and sites (public and private) as part of the public-private mix 
(PPM): 

● Hospital engagement; 

● Establishment of social businesses and franchises; and 

● Link private providers to publicly funded TB programs. 

 

IR 1.2. Increase bacteriological and drug-susceptibility testing coverage 

 

Laboratory services in Uzbekistan represent a five-level network: 1) smear microscopy labs, 208 at the 
primary healthcare level and 12 in prisons; 2) 63 smear microscopy with Xpert labs, including 3 in 
prisons); 3) 14 labs with line probe assay (LPA) capacity; 4) 8 culture laboratories providing drugsusceptibility 
testing (DST), and 5) two national reference laboratories (NRLs) in Tashkent and Nukus. 
In 2021, the NRL in Tashkent passed an external quality assessment by SRL Gauting, Germany. 
Uzbekistan has made significant progress in increasing rapid TB diagnostics coverage. USAID provided 
46 new Xpert platforms, increasing the total number of Xperts available in all regions and the 
penitentiary system to 111 machines. The number of annual Xpert tests performed gradually increased 
from 15,000 to 108,000 tests between 2014 and 2019; however, it dropped back to 55,000 in 2020 due to 
the impact of COVID-19 but slightly rebounded back in 2021 to 64,000 annual tests. LPA equipment 
(for first- and second-line DST) is available in six regional laboratories, covering all regions except 
Jizzakh, Sirdarya, and the prison system. 

 

The significant drop in TB case notifications in 2020 and 2021 compared to 2019 is attributed to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, which disrupted access and provision of TB services and aggravated the TB 
disease burden. Persistent barriers to scaling up high-quality diagnosis include the absence of an 
information system and poor specimen transportation practice. There is no unified laboratory 
management information system in the country. A database in MS Access supports operations at levels 
3–5 TB laboratories, while laboratories at levels 1–3 use paper-based information systems. A laboratory 
registrar enables electronic data exchange and processing of laboratory results at culture and MGM 
(Molecular Genetic Methods) laboratories (GeneXpert and LPA). Despite some improvements in USAID 
pilot sites in a few regions, there is no national TB specimen transportation policy and reliable system in 
the country. 

 


Illustrative activities: 

 

● Investments focused on improving laboratory capacity, including Xpert machine and cartridge 
procurements, maintenance and training, diagnostic network assessments, TA, and training to improve 
the quality of TB diagnosis; 

● Interventions to increase the use of appropriate diagnostic tools and to strengthen functional 
specimen transport networks and quality laboratory management systems; 

● Interventions aimed at scaling-up rapid diagnostic tests and diagnostic monitoring tools; 

● Strategies and approaches to increase DR-TB case finding focus on efforts to improve the 
coverage and usage of Xpert or other rapid tests that detect rifampicin resistance. 

● Achieve complete coverage and improvements in the quality of drug-susceptibility (DST) for all 
forms of TB utilizing phenotypic and genotyping methods. 

● Introduction of stool-based TB testing and updated treatment decision algorithms for children 
using a molecular WHO recommended rapid diagnostic test (ex, Xpert) to improve bacteriological testing 
for children and the quality of clinical diagnosis. 

 

IR 1.3. Increase successful initiation and treatment outcomes for all forms of TB 

 

Patients with drug-susceptible TB (DS-TB) receive treatment with quality first-line TB medicines, fully 
procured by the government of Uzbekistan. The treatment success among all 14,224 TB new and relapse 
cases notified in 2020 remained high at 91%, as in the previous year. USAID supports different activities 
to improve TB diagnosis and treatment and implements an electronic surveillance system. USAID 
developed and conducted training for healthcare providers on patient-centered TB treatment approaches 
in pilot sites. USAID contributed to developing a national protocol for video-supported treatment (VST), 
a cost-efficient, patient-centered outpatient solution to improve TB treatment. USAID procured 
smartphones for TB patients and tablets for healthcare staff, developed VST training materials, trained 
staff, and provided ongoing technical assistance to healthcare providers for VST implementation. VST 
played an important role in continuing patient care during the COVID lockdown periods. USAID 
involved MDTs to provide psychosocial support to TB patients and organized a “TB patient school” 
program. 

 

Despite all the progress in DS-TB treatment, persistent challenges still exist, including limited access to 
rapid TB diagnosis and delayed initiation of therapy, a partially implemented pharmacovigilance and 
drug safety monitoring system, almost mandatory practice of DS-TB patients hospitalization, and 
financial hardship of TB patients while on treatment. 

 

In 2020-21 the COVID-19 pandemic significantly affected the overall detection of DR-TB cases. In 2019 
Uzbekistan did not have a routine surveillance system for anti-TB drug resistance. The last drug 
resistance survey (DRS) was conducted in 2010–2011. In 2021, the NTP is preparing for the next DRS in 
2022-23. 

 

There are several barriers to finding and effectively treating DR-TB patients. The Xpert test is not used 
everywhere as an initial TB test for individuals with presumptive TB, despite being recommended in the 
updated national algorithm. There is a slow pace in implementing new treatment regimens, 1) with 
modified all oral shorter treatment (mSTR) and 2) bedaquiline, pretomanid and linezolid (BPaL). 
Inadequate support for patients receiving the lengthy and challenging DR-TB treatment represents a 
serious gap. DR-TB treatment is currently strictly hospital-based, a more people-centered model of DRTB 
care should be adopted to improve treatment adherence and outcomes. 


 

Illustrative activities improve appropriate treatment initiation: 

 

● Development and roll-out of more patient-centered approaches to TB treatment; 

● Assessing care cascades and improving the quality of TB care; 

● Interventions that increase adherence, including improved access to supportive services such as 
counseling, nutritional support, ancillary medications, and economic strengthening; 

● Novel approaches such as m-Health and e-Health, behavior change communications, and peer 
support; 

● Trace and reduce Interruptions in treatment, both pre- and post-initiation of treatment; 

● Link and refer TB patients to services for co-morbidities and risk factors (e.g. diabetes, 
malnutrition, HIV). 

 

Illustrative activities to improve treatment completion rate: 

 

● Second-line drug susceptibility testing (DST); 

● Scale up of treatment capacity, including expanded community services, treatment at home, and 
innovative treatment strategies (such as video-observed treatment); 

● Quality improvement of DR-TB treatment services, including cohort analyses and improved sideeffect 
management; 

● Strengthened mechanisms for active tuberculosis drug-safety monitoring and management 
(aDSM); and 

● Interventions to reduce primary and early LTFU and ensure rapid treatment initiation (including 
case managers, patient psychosocial support and education, use of optimized short regimens, expanded 
use of new drugs and regimens when indicated, and elimination of catastrophic DR-TB patient costs). 

 

IR 1.4. Increase and improve TB preventive treatment and other TB preventive measures 

In 2021, the number of TPT among infected children below five years in the household and close 
contacts group (2,059) was far behind the UNHLM target (3,260), while the number of patients 
preventively treated in the age group above five years (10,281) is above the UNHLM target (9,263). The 
number of patients with HIV status who received isoniazid preventive therapy (8,397) also exceeded the 
UNHLM target for this group (7, 296). A total of 20,737 individuals on preventive treatment in 2021 
represents 104% of TPT implementation goals towards the UNHLM target (19,820). 

 

Recording and reporting TB preventive activities remain a challenge in the country, especially on 
preventive treatment results and outcomes. Specific data provided by the NTP is based on indirect 
information and assumptions. Six-month isoniazid is the country's only TB preventive treatment (TPT) 
regimen. Additionally, responsibility for the TPT is not always clearly divided between TB and PHC 
services. 

 

 Healthcare workers' safety and availability of personal protective equipment (PPE) have become one of 
the top priorities for the MOH across all healthcare facilities during the COVID-19 pandemic. USAID 
provided technical support to manage the PPE supply chain and trained healthcare providers and 
communities on the proper use of PPE and appropriate measures for infection prevention and control 
(IPC). 

 

Illustrative activities to improve preventive treatment completion: 


 

● Expand TB preventive therapy, including improved TB infection (TBI) detection and treatment 
for individuals at high risk of disease progression (people with suppressed immune systems, household 
contacts, and young children). 

● Improve contact investigation to ensure all household and social contacts likely exposed to TB 
access TPT, including children, and prioritize high risk contacts for follow up services. 

● Train health care providers on people-centered TB preventive treatment services; 

● Refine and implement innovative models for outpatient TB and DR-TB treatment with the 
provision of comprehensive case management services through PHC, CSOs, community-based health 
committees, and communities to encourage treatment adherence; 

● Support the development and rollout of a social behavior change strategy (SBC) and SBC 
national guidelines that enhance outpatient and case management models; 

 

Illustrative activities for improving infection prevention and control: 

 

● Strengthen Infection Prevention and Control standards, including improved administrative and 
environmental controls, the use of personal protective equipment, health care worker surveillance and 
safety measures, and interventions to interrupt the chain of transmission in high-risk settings or among 
high-risk populations. 

 

Illustrative activities of community engagement in prevention and communication 

 

● Strengthen community knowledge and awareness of TB through CSOs and PHC to increase TB 
and DR-TB case detection rates and reduce stigma and discrimination against TB patients; 

● Dersign, conduct outreach activities together with key community leaders to mitigate and prevent 
social attitudes and behaviors that perpetuate TB-related stigma; 

● Empower former TB patients to become role models and engage them in peer outreach with the 
support of CSOs. 

 

 Sub IR 1.4.1. GENDER: Develop targeted communication strategies on TB prevention, awareness, and 
treatment cascade for various vulnerable groups, including migrant workers, youth and women to 
improve gender-sensitive information, education and communication. 

 

Illustrative activities: 

 

● Increase knowledge among healthcare workers of gendered physiological and socio-economic 
differences in TB infection between men and women, and how to implement this into the process of 
identification, diagnosis, and treatment outcomes. 

● Gender-based landscape analyses: sex/age/income/geographic location related to gender 
differences in TB awareness, stigma, adherence and services and utilize this information to inform the 
development of interventions. 

● Develop context and population specific targeting messaging. 

 

Sub-objective 2: Strengthen TB Health Systems 

IR 2.1 Strengthen governance and management 

 

The GOU has demonstrated a strong commitment to TB efforts and pledged to achieve the UNHLM 


targets. NTP incorporated those targets into the current NSP 2021-2026. The GOU laid out a gradual 
increase in budget in Presidential Decree # 4191 On Improvement of Phthisiatric (Tuberculosis) and 
Pulmonological Services in February 2019. In 2020 and 2021, the GOU procured quality first and 
second-line TB drugs with domestic funding, despite significant financial spending on COVID-19 
response and pandemic-related negative economic impact. Future government and partners' TB activities 
will be supported through the new national regulatory framework, a new Presidential Decree to be issued 
in 2022 and which will be based on TB NSP 2021-2026, developed earlier and recently updated. TB Free 
Uzbekistan will not focus on health financing for TB; this will be addressed through a separate activity. 

 

Uzbekistan's MOH and USAID signed a Statement of Partnership (MOU) in March 2019 and monitor its 
implementation regularly through quarterly meetings, reports, and activity reviews. USAID develops an 
annual TB Roadmap in close partnership with the NTP and other key stakeholders. Still, challenges 
remain with sustaining the speed of the health system reforms, including poor quality of services, 
inadequate involvement of community-based organizations and affected populations, and slow pace of 
financing reforms for TB services and fully transitioning to an outpatient TB treatment model. There is a 
slow integration of TB services in PHC because of an absence of incentives for service provision 
(insufficient mechanism of purchasing healthcare services). There is no defined vision for the service 
delivery network. Funding is limited and fragmented and not targeted to the population's needs. 
Budgeting is insufficient for program management and largely depends on donors' and partners' support. 
Despite the highest governmental commitment, the involvement of other ministries and governmental 
entities is still suboptimal, and there are no activities on establishing the Multi-sectoral Accountability 
Framework (TB MAF). 

 

With USAID support, Uzbekistan is one of the countries in the region that has institutionalized the use of 
QuanTB as a national quantification and early warning system for TB medicines to maintain stock levels 
and reduce risks for stock-outs and potential expiration. USAID trained NTP staff in all regions on Drug 
management of TB drugs: new methods of drug quantification with the use of the QuanTB program. 
USAID supported NTP with the GF grant application for 2021-2024 to supply FLDs and SLDs and 
switch to short-modified and non-injectable regimens for DR-TB patients. 

 

USAID's Promoting the Quality of Medicines Plus (PQM+) activity worked to ensure access to qualityassured 
TB medicines, including adopting the WHO accelerated registration of WHO-prequalified 
medications, supporting the manufacturer in Uzbekistan for WHO prequalification, improving quality 
control laboratories for testing medicines according to international standards, and establishing the Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) inspectorate at the Agency for Development of the Pharmaceutical 
Industry in Uzbekistan. 

 

The NTP often needs external support and capacity-building (due to the high staff turnover at the regional 
and central levels) for drug management, data collection, and analysis for procurement and supply chain 
decision-making. Drug management and PSM guidelines need to be updated. NTP has to deal with a 
complicated registration process for all TB medicines procured by domestic funds or apply for a waiver 
to the Cabinet of Ministers, which is a lengthy process. 

 

Illustrative activities: 

 

● Support further implementation of TB healthcare system reforms; 

● Improving the NTP processes to more efficiently and effectively develop, implement, and 
monitor national and sub-national TB strategic plans; 


● Increase transparency and accountability of the NTP and TB response; 

● Support the host government reforms of TB financing at TB facility and PHC levels; 

● Increase financial contributions from the private sector and non-state partners; 

● Strengthen the TB legal framework and its dissemination; 

● Improve mechanisms and activities to promote inclusiveness and involvement of communitybased 
organizations, civil society, medical councils, and professional associations in the TB response; 

● Strengthen approaches to outsource TB services to non-governmental entities; 

● Use of early warning systems for stock levels; 

● Strengthening of pharmacovigilance systems. 

 

IR 2.2 Improve monitoring and evaluation (M&E), including data systems 

 

USAID supported the national M&E TWG, updated protocols and checklists for monitoring and 
evaluation, and supported and participated in regular monitoring field visits jointly with the NTP and 
WHO. In partnership with WHO, USAID supported NTP in introducing the District Health Information 
System Version 2 (DHIS2) TB surveillance electronic register in Uzbekistan. USAID provided technical 
assistance in finalizing the electronic TB register and reporting forms -TB07 and TB08. The new TB 
register will be piloted in one of the three project sites selected by the NTP/MoH. 

 

The main remaining barrier to a robust M&E system is the absence of a national-level electronic 
reporting system. The capacity of the M&E unit at the NTP level to manage national data and reporting is 
understaffed and has minimal resources. The low capacity of the M&E unit doesn't allow for establishing 
quality supervision activities at the subnational level (from regional to rayon level). 

 

The data collection system is not well established and not flexible enough to provide NTP with up-to-date 
information for operational and managerial decisions. The issues mentioned above contribute to the 
absence of well-structured, consistent national monitoring visits from central to regional and regional to 
district. These activities are mainly dependent on the Global Fund and USAID monitoring visits support. 
TB Free Uzbekistan will ensure that data collection, analysis and reporting is disaggregated by sex, age 
and other relevant categories. 

 

Illustrative activities: 

 

● Facilitate consensus among stakeholders to launch and implement the new electronic TB register 
and other health management information platforms, ensuring smooth operation of DSM, patient-level 
drug consumption, and laboratory information management systems, and provide timely, accurate data to 
program managers and decision-makers at national and oblast levels; TB Free Uzbekistan’s data systems 
will ensure connection with the national eHealth system. 

● Support regular implementation of data quality assessment (DQA) activities and strengthen NTP 
staff capacity at central and oblast levels; 

● Build capacity to learn and utilize data visualization, GIS, and mapping to analyze programs and 
inform activity directions; 

● Enhance NTP capacity at the central and oblast levels on data collection, reporting, and analysis 
of TB data, including age and sex disaggregates, including age bands (0-4, 5-19); 

● Support implementation of routine data review sessions for data sharing and data-driven decisionmaking 
among stakeholders; 

● Document and disseminate best practices from Uzbekistan to other countries in the region; 

● Support development and strengthening of a robust case-based TB surveillance system. 


● Build NTP data collection and analysis capacity to disaggregate all treatment adherence and 
failure and loss to follow-up data by age and sex. This will support governments and community based 
organizations’ understanding of reasons and influencing factors behind behaviors of men and women. 

 

IR 2.3 Improve the capacity of human resources within the TB response 

 

GOU health reforms prioritized the development of human resources for health through various policies. 
Eight thousand one hundred fifty staff members are working in the TB services as of Dec 2021, of whom 
6,610 are nurses and 1,538 doctors, with some differences across the regions. The Ministry of Labor and 
Social Protection determines salaries with a 50% salary increase for occupational risk of TB in line with 
Presidential Decree #4191 (2019). 

 

The development of human resources for TB control was reflected in the Program on Fighting TB in the 
Republic of Uzbekistan for 2011–2015 and 2019-2021. The current NSP for 2021-2025 includes 
planning the comprehensive implementation plan for the sustainable development of human resources for 
TB control. The NTP is in the initial stage of analyzing the existing human resources for TB services or 
specifying the gaps and challenges. TB doctors and PHC personnel need training and postgraduate 
education, capacity-building in drug management and laboratory activities, operational research, and 
international cooperation. 

 

Illustrative activities: 

 

● Support development and implementation of national policies and plans for human resources as 
they relate to TB operations; 

● Improve the quality of TB disease management at the primary health facility level for public 
health and curative services; 

● Task shifting to make the best possible use of available healthcare staff for the TB program; 

● Contribute to improving pre-service and in-service TB clinical training; 

● Support TB human resource assessments; 

● Development of national cadres for community-based TB service delivery. 

 

ANTICIPATED RISKS AND CHALLENGES 

 

The sub-optimal domestic financing of the TB program and an overall fragile health system with poor 
quality of health services and other health challenges pose a risk of interruption of TB service provision 
and further spread of TB infection and disease. Fluctuating economic stability, political environment, 
socio-cultural, and other factors can also significantly affect the introduction and implementation of 
innovative TB activities in Uzbekistan and should be incorporated into the planning process. 

 

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to present significant challenges. USAID/Uzbekistan must 
respond rapidly and strategically to minimize the disruption of TB service delivery to end TB. Thus, a 
particular focus must be on boosting TB notification and treatment success rates and strengthening TB 
prevention and care practices. 

 

The funding allocated through the Global Fund grants for TB program implementation is shrinking and 
moving into a transition phase. There is a limited donor landscape, with few private sector partners 
involved in TB response in the region. Coordination with other donors and implementers is critical to 
ensure complementarities and synergies in programmatic approaches and prevent duplication of efforts. 


 

Additionally, civil society and local organizations' roles and voices in TB services are perceived as weak 
and need strengthening. 

 

OPERATIONAL RESEARCH 

 

Improve evidence-based programming and measurement to inform policy, programming, and 
monitoring for TB 

 

The applicants must develop a continuum of care model that tracks screening, referral, diagnosis, curative 
and preventive treatment initiation, and completion of treatment/prophylaxis points along a continuum of 
care. The applicants should propose effective data collection, analysis, monitoring, and reporting tools 
and applications to measure the continuum of care. Measuring the decline of TB incidence in the focal 
geographic areas will be essential. 

 

PART 5: ACTIVITY PARAMETERS & CROSS-CUTTING PRINCIPLES 

 

Gender and Social Inclusion: 

 

USAID makes every effort to integrate gender, women’s empowerment and inclusive development into 
relevant strategies, projects, and activities throughout the Agency’s Program Cycle. USAID’s Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment 2020 policy requires that our activities promote gender equality, 
prevent and respond to gender-based violence and empower women and girls. 

 

The applicant should assign a Gender Specialist or Gender POC and describe how it will: 1) analyze the 
gender norms that influence the reasons men and women delay treatment and drop out of treatment; 2) 
develop activities that seek to reduce gender-specific factors that lead to treatment delays and drop-out; 
3) strengthen case management counseling skills so that health care providers and social workers employ 
gender-responsive counseling approaches; 4) support community outreach workers/CSOs to support the 
resilience of men and women and disadvantaged groups with TB and their family members to address 
gender-specific risk factors, stigma, and discrimination they experience from healthcare providers, within 
the family, and in their communities. 

 

Besides the requirement that all data are sex-disaggregated, the applicant should include at least one 
illustrative gender-sensitive indicator for the AMELP to monitor if gender-related differences are 
changing. The Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) section of the work plan should include 
lessons learned on integrating gender into the TB program and course corrections and adaptation to the 
activities to address gender issues outlined above. The applicant should include these strategies in the 
technical approach. 

 

Youth 

 

With over 60 percent of the population under the age of 30, Uzbekistan’s youth have the potential to 
transform the country through their contributions to the labor market and Uzbekistan’s economic growth. 
In line with the recently issued 2022 USAID Youth in Development Policy, the activity will integrate 
youth issues and engage young people across agency activity cycles. The“Free TB Uzbekistan” activity 
includes concrete and practical approaches that will not only address the challenges youth face to access 
timely TB diagnostic services but also support young people in completing lengthy treatment. The new 


activity will include tailored to youth messaging, outreach efforts, and strategies to fight stigma. 
Additionally, the new activity will include support for the less invasive, more child-friendly diagnostic 
method of stool-based testing and improved treatment decision algorithms for younger people, to ensure 
high quality diagnosis and treatment services are available to meet their needs. 

 

Private Sector Engagement 

 

USAID/Uzbekistan's Promoting the Quality of Medicines Plus (PQM+) Project provides technical 
assistance to domestic private-sector producers to manufacture TB drugs according to international 
quality assurance standards. The new TB activity and PQM+ will promote government procurement of 
quality-assured TB and TB-related medical products and their distribution to and use in health facilities. 
Other private sector engagement activities might include developing sustained partnership or resource 
mobilization with Uzbekistan's local or international private sector to support areas such as sample 
transport, supply chain, digital health information technology, pharmacies and occupational counseling 
and screening. 

 

Digital Transformation 

 

The new activity will work to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of TB detection, treatment, and 
prevention with the adoption and consistent use of digital technology. The activity will work to 
strengthen the critical components of the digital ecosystems of TB services in connection to other 
healthcare digital systems that enable timely, efficient, and patient-centered care. It might include but is 
not limited to the following: 

● Introducing critical digital equipment and technologies for TB laboratory management system, 
electronic TB surveillance system, TB medicine and other essential commodities supply chain 
management, specimen transportation, and electronic health records system, 

● Introducing digital solutions to increase the healthcare providers' capacity and quality of care, 
such as using computer-assisted diagnostics, digital access to the most updated clinical guidance, instant 
access to health record system, laboratory management system, clinical management system, and use of 
video-conferencing equipment for telemedicine and access specialized expertise, 

● Teaching and supporting end-users of digital healthcare services (patients and family members), 
such as video-supported treatment, access to information, and healthcare providers. 

 

Environmental Compliance/Climate Change 

 

Based on the current TB programming in Uzbekistan, it is anticipated that there will be interventions 
qualifying for a Negative Determination with Conditions. Therefore, specific Environmental/Climate 
change considerations shall be addressed in the design. TB Free Uzbekistan will be encouraged to 
coordinate with USAID/Uzbekistan’s climate change focused activities. 

 

PART 6: MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING (MEL) 

Monitoring, evaluation, and learning are instrumental in tracking progress in achieving the goals and 
objectives of the USAID investments in the country through its bilateral activity. It is a critical 
component in USAID's efforts to ensure effective accountability of investments in TB response at the 
global, regional, and country level. USAID expects that monitoring, evaluation, and learning will be 
integrated into the new bilateral activity. 

 


The applicant is expected to develop a monitoring, evaluation and learning plan for the activity with all 
considerations regarding activity results and sub-results, strategic goal and objectives of the activity, 
strategic framework, and country strategy for USAID/Uzbekistan Mission. This management tool will 
include a monitoring, an evaluation, and a learning section and will be revised during co-creation and 
finalized as part of the final application package in consultation with USAID. 

 

The monitoring section will specify indicators and the processes by which implementing partners and 
USAID/Uzbekistan will routinely monitor the progress of activities against stated objectives. This section 
should incorporate the ten core indicators based on the USAID's Performance-Based Monitoring and 
Evaluation Framework for TB Programs (Guide for Indicators). These indicators are aligned with the 
leading global strategic documents, including the U.S. Government's Global TB Strategy, Uzbekistan's 
National Strategic Plan, the Stop TB Partnership's Global Plan to End TB, the WHO End TB Strategy, 
and UNGA HLM Political Declaration on TB. Other extended indicators from the comprehensive list 
presented in the PBMEF guide may also be considered to help track progress towards achieving set 
targets of core indicators. The monitoring section should also envision a clear and concise Data Quality 
Assurance (DQA) plan to verify the quality and reliability of data collected for every indicator. 

 

The evaluation section should include a description of any systematic collection and analysis of data as a 
basis for further improving and informing decisions about programming. While research questions may 
be submitted for consideration as part of the evaluation, applicants should focus on formative and process 
evaluation questions. USAID may procure an independent impact evaluation of this award, and 
evaluations conducted by the awardee are subject to review and approval by USAID. 

 

USAID's Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) methodology is central to the overall project 
strategy and the MEL plan. CLA allows a project to maintain a culture of learning that guides adaptation 
and improves the quality of project design and interventions. The Recipient will promote a strong ethos 
of generating and disseminating evidence and learnings that the Recipient expects will lead to improved 
coverage and quality of TB service delivery in Uzbekistan. 

 

The learning section should identify and discuss data from monitoring, portfolio reviews, research 
findings, evaluations, analyses conducted by USAID or third parties, knowledge gained from experience, 
stocktaking exercises, and other sources. Applicants should detail how knowledge learned will be applied 
throughout programming to implementation approaches, processes, and stakeholder engagement. 
Applicants should further discuss how lessons learned will be disseminated to activity stakeholders, 
partners, and collaborators to be used for making programmatic decisions that enhance the success of 
interventions designed to achieve expected intermediate results. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this NOFO. Subject to funding 
availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID’s estimate it will provide approximately 
$14,000,000 in total USAID funding, with an initial obligation of $2,400,000. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is five years. The start date will be determined at the time of the 
award. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 

All approvals and actions resulting from the substantial involvement below will be delegated to the 
Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR): 

 

a. Approval of the Recipient's Annual Implementation Plans: 

 

The initial Annual Implementation Plan and subsequent implementation plans must be submitted to and 
approved per the description of implementation plans provided in “Reporting Requirements”. 

 

b. Approval of Specified Key Personnel: 

 

Key personnel must be submitted for approval in writing as designated in the Section “Key Personnel”. 

 

c. Approval of Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (MEL Plan): 

 

The initial MEL Plan and subsequent updates to the MEL Plan must be submitted to and approved per the 
description provided in “Performance Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning”. 

 

d. Direction and Redirection of Activities: 

 

Specific direction or redirection of the work due to interrelationships with other projects or activities, 
and/or changes in the USG priorities, may be directed by the AOR. All such direction or redirection must 
be within the scope of the program description, budget, and other terms and conditions of the award. 

 

4. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic codes for the procurement of commodities and services under this program are Code 937 
(the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced developing 
countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source) and 110 (the United States, the 
independent states of the former Soviet Union, or a developing country, but excluding any country that is 
a prohibited source). 

 

5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 


The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the TB Free Uzbekistan which is 
authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement 
of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the 
application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering 
Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and 
conditions of the Federal award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. Qualified U.S. and Non-U.S. non-governmental organizations 
may participate under this NOFO. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial assistance 
from USAID. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

A cost share is not required on this award. 

 

3. Other 

 

There is no limit to the number of applications any one entity may submit. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 

 

Primary: Ms. Gulzhanat Rysdauletova 

 Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

 

Secondary: Mr. Zafar Khamidullaev 

 Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

 

Address: USAID/Uzbekistan 

 3 Moyqorghon Street, 5th Block, 

 Yunusobod District, 100093 Tashkent 

Email: AlmatyAASolicitations@usaid.gov 

 grysdauletova@usaid.gov 

 zkhamidullaev@usaid.gov 

 

2. Questions and Answers: 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted to AlmatyAASolicitations@usaid.gov with copies 
to Acquisition and Assistance Specialists Gulzhanat Rysdauletova at grysdauletova@usaid.gov and Zafar 
Khamidullaev at zkhamidullaev@usaid.gov, no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter, 
as amended. 

 

Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all 
other prospective applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in 
submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be submitted in 
two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. This subsection 
addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please see subsections 5 and 6, 
below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications. The 
Technical Application must address technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must 
present the costs, and address risk and other related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the following 
information: 

 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 

● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the alternate contact person (by 
name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address); 

● Program name; 

● Notice of Funding Opportunity number; 


● Name of any proposed subrecipients or partnerships, including their names, type of relationship 
(e.g., subcontract or strategic/technical collaborator)and indicate if sub-partner is international or local 
(Uzbek) or regional (Central Asian) organization or entity; 

● UEI of the applicant. 

 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the application. 
Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by evidence of that 
agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the issuing office. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent sections. 
Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 

● Written in English. 

● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font or a similar size 
typeset, 1” margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 

● 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 12 
point Times New Roman requirement. 

● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted in 
Microsoft Excel. 

● The Technical Application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as appropriate. 

● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no hidden 
formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to the Excel 
version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official Cost Application submission is the unlocked 
Excel version. 

 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may be 
considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should retain a copy 
of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted to AlmatyAASolicitations@usaid.gov with 
copies to Acquisition and Assistance Specialists Gulzhanat Rysdauletova at grysdauletova@usaid.gov 
and Zafar Khamidullaev at zkhamidullaev@usaid.gov, no later than the closing date and time indicated 
on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. Applicants must 
retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date 
and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 

Email submissions must include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In 
addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email 
relates to the technical or Cost Application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments 
(e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your Cost Application is being sent in two emails, the first email 
should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 
2". 

 


USAID’s preference is that the Technical Application and the Cost Application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a Technical Application 
into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how to 
collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic applications if 
no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email to 
confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, please 
send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name if submitted 
via www.grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once 
unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours 
occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in 
sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government 
infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, applicants 
are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Central Asia cannot guarantee their 
acceptance by the internet server. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The Technical Application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection for award of 
the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The Technical Application should demonstrate the applicant's 
capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this activity. Therefore, it should be 
specific, complete and presented concisely. The applicant must address how it proposes to carry out the 
Program Description contained in Section A. The application should take into account the requirements 
of the program and evaluation criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The Technical Application is limited to twenty-five (25) pages. The Technical Application must include 
the following sections: 

a. Cover Page (not included in 25-page limit) 

The cover page should include the information listed in Section 3 above. 

b. Table of Contents (not included in 25-page limit) 

The table of contents must list all parts of the Technical Application, with page numbers and attachments. 

 

c. Acronym List (not included in 25-page limit) 

d. Executive Summary (included in 25-page limit; 1 page) 

● Contain brief descriptions of the general approach, including innovations, and approaches to build 
sustainability. 

 

e. Technical Approach must be organized as follows (included in 25-page limit): 


The applicants must present a logical and evidence-based technical approach demonstrating a clear 
understanding of the technical requirements to prevent, detect and diagnose, and treat all forms of 
tuberculosis with an emphasis on vulnerable populations. 

 

Areas of specific consideration should include approaches to address the Intermediate Results under each 
of the two Sub-objectives. In Sub-Objective 1 for Services, address case detection through targeted active 
finding and screening; testing outcomes through use of new diagnostic technologies; successful treatment 
outcomes for all forms of TB and use of shorter treatment regimens and new drugs for drug-resistant TB; 
and contact investigation and post-exposure therapy for close contacts of TB patients. 

 

In Sub-Objective 2 for Systems, applicants must describe a health systems strengthening approach that 
covers: bolstering the policy environment for TB control; formulating the TB component under Universal 
Health Coverage; increasing the integration of quality urban TB services into public sector, NGO, and 
private sector provider platforms; and facilitating linkages between urban TB service organizations and 
social support organizations. The applicants must demonstrate a technical and operational understanding 
of the gender dynamics of TB disease, the social and economic context of TB infection in Uzbekistan, 
and the development of a continuum of care model, its measurement, and related research. 

 

Demonstration of understanding of the Uzbekistan health system and its key government and private 
sector stakeholders, characteristics of at-risk populations, and collaboration mechanisms between key 
stakeholders in high-transmission areas and among at-risk populations is critical. This must include a 
description of appropriate interventions that will achieve the Activity goal and objectives. The applicants 
must present a logical methodology on how to adaptively manage these interventions, specifying data 
requirements and milestones. 

 

f. Inclusion of Gender (included in 25 page limit of Technical Approach) 

 

The applicants must demonstrate in their Technical Application how they will identify and address all the 
gender related barriers. The application should also show how they are aligned with health system 
strengthening. Another desired outcome of the policy is to reduce gender based violence. Evidence shows 
that women and men can face stigma and discrimination from their family and their employers once they 
are diagnosed with TB. Both boys and girls also might drop out of school after being diagnosed with TB 
even after they no longer are at risk of transmitting the disease. The activity must address the ways in 
which stigma and discrimination affect women and men differently. 

 

g. Management Approach and Staffing Plan (4 page limit, included in 25 page limit of Technical 
Approach): 

 

Management Plan: 

 

USAID prefers collaborative applications structured as a prime and subrecipient relationship with activity 
staff clearly defined under one single management structure. Consortiums without a clear hierarchy and 
delineation of authority among members are discouraged. The applicants must describe the relationship 
between prime and subrecipients, clearly defining the value each partner brings. In regards to 
sustainability, consortium applicants with local (Uzbek or Central Asian) entity sub-partners are highly 
encouraged. 

 

Key Team Positions and Staffing Plan: 


 

The applicants must provide a description of its proposed team for key positions to accomplish all of the 
objectives within the TB Free Uzbekistan activity. The applicants must propose individuals for key 
personnel positions who are highly qualified and able to fulfill all important responsibilities. Key 
Personnel CVs, Letters of Commitment, and References will be requested from the apparent successful 
applicant. The staffing plan should clearly demonstrate the potential to facilitate the achievement of the 
Activity’s scope and objectives. 

 

h. Organizational Capacity (included in 25 page limit of General Technical Approach) 

 

Briefly describe organizational capacity – technical, managerial, financial, etc. to carry out the proposed 
intervention, including the business model for your organization’s intervention, prior work in this sector, 
your organization’s credibility within targeted communities, and a demonstrable commitment to 
coordinating your organization’s efforts within the context. Please note the extent to which the proposed 
program is supported by local organizations. 

 

To demonstrate prior work in this sector, please provide the details of five activities (ongoing or 
complete) that you implemented within the last five years. Note that these activities may be the same as 
or different from the list required in the Cost Application. 

 

i. Annexes (not included in the page limit) 

 

Annexes must include and are limited to ONLY the following: 

 

Annex 1 - Gender Analysis 

 

The applicant should describe the methods used to assess the current gender relationships and status in 
target communities and identify the potential impacts of project implementation by gender. 

 

Annex 2 - Geographic Maps 

 

To illustrate the proposed geographic scope or other key elements of the proposed Technical Approach, 
the applicant may choose to include geographic maps, as required. 

 

Annex 3 - Organizational Chart and Staffing Plan 

 

A visual organizational chart and staffing plan should be included. The applicant shall present, through 
the organizational chart, the proposed program management structure. The staffing plan should be 
consistent with the applicant’s technical approach and sufficient for management of the technical 
components proposed in the Application. The information in this Annex should represent the information 
presented in the Management Plan of the main Technical Approach narrative section. 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. While no 
page limit exists for the full Cost Application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible 
while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must illustrate the entire period 
of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 


 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the 
Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. Applicants should 
not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this listing 
with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 

 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 

 

The applicant must sign and submit the Cost Application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms can be 
accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF- 
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 

 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the Recipient” 
document found at https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/303mav.pdf 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and Assistance 
(M/OAA). 

 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel-compatible file with visible formulas and 
references and must be broken out by project year. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise 
inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make award and 
may result in a rejection of the Cost Application. The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to 


allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address 
any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative 
must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs 
are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by major 
budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any potential sub-applicants 
for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for Summary Budget Template. 

● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to determine that 
the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the applicant’s program and are 
allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

● Detailed Budgets for each subrecipient, for all federal funding and potential cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 

 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

1) Personnel and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, and 
salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down by 
specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The 
Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the services 
rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of the applicant. Applicants 
must provide their established written policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written 
policies do not address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative 
must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 

 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an agency 
of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an 
applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose a rate and explain how 
the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown 
comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, 
expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 

 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the trips. Per 
Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel policies. When 
appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, 
and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and quantity. 
The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the basis for the 
estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in 
light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; 
alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 

 


5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as the 
applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 

 

6) Construction – If applicable. 

 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 
miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant should 
indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship 
to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be 
minimal. 

 

9) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will charge all 
costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. The 
application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable supporting 
information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved NICRA 
and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than USAID, 
provide the contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a 
provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect 
Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs but 
may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected 
must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to 
negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The applicant must 
describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further 
information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged as A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non-U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is at the 
discretion of the AO 

 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that includes the 
following: 

 


● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 

● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, including 
categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting, 
or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one program or activity, such as depreciation, rental 
costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and 
estimates for the current year 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all programs 
and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to each program or activity 
to which the cost applies. 

 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de minimis rate, 
the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional supporting 
information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be under consideration 
after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the applicant’s requested method. 

 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for prior 
approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost elements 
for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the applicant must specify and 
justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require prior written 
approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time of 
award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 

● Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) 

● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 

● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 

● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation list 

● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 

● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 

● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for mitigation. 

 

g) UEI and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique entity 
identifier (UEI) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each applicant (unless the 
applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 
25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) 
is required to: 


(i) Be registered in SAM before submitting its application; 

(ii) Provide a valid unique entity identifier in its application and all proposed subrecipients; 

(iii) Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during which it 
has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 
It also must state that the Federal awarding agency may not make a Federal award to an applicant until 
the applicant has complied with all applicable unique entity identifier and SAM requirements and, if an 
applicant has not fully complied with the requirements by the time the Federal awarding agency is ready 
to make a Federal award, the Federal awarding agency may determine that the applicant is not qualified 
to receive a Federal award and use that determination as a basis for making a Federal award to another 
applicant. 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by the time 
USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not qualified to receive an 
award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another applicant. 

Unique Entity Identifier (UEI): http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start Guide 
and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to International 
Registrants. 

 

h) History of Performance 

 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its costreimbursement 
contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, not to 
exceed 5 (five) awards, as follows: 

 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 

● Award Number; 

● Activity Title; 

● A brief description of the activity; 

● Period of Performance; 

● Award Amount; 

● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last 3 years; and 

● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at the 
organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information including 
telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information on its 
performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an applicant’s history 
of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its review of the applicant’s risk. 
The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is 
necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 


i) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan, 
which, after internal approvals, will be incorporated into any resulting award by the Agreement Officer. 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 


a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding Strategy," 
describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it is promoted and 
communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 


b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to 
the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget portion 
of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and 
will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other 
assistance instrument. 
e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 


(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, 
banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 


(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 


(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID logo and 
brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the USAID Web site at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or APS states that the USAID 
Administrator has approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or with) the generous 
support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when acknowledging contributions. 


(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 


(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must explain how 
USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the program or project. 


(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that competes with the 
USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to consistently identify this program, the 
applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 


(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 

beneficiaries and any special target segments. 


(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 


(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service announcement, billboards, 
Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 


(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host country citizens, 
such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so forth. Applicant must incorporate the 
USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is from the American People.” 


(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support this project or 
program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, including any 
planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 


(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and related 
materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if they will receive 
the same prominence as USAID. 


e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 
adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data 
submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and made part 

of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

 

[END OF PRE-AWARD TERM] 

 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 


a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that will 
visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline 
“from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency, and is found on 
the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to the 
applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget portion 


of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and 
will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other 
assistance instrument. 


e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the applicant 
plans to produce, and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, including: 


(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure projects or other 
sites physical in nature; 


(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, public service 
announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, media, or communications 
products funded by USAID; 


(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including commodities or 
equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief programs; and 

 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 


(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, fairs, 
workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the 
recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 

 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 


(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 


(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program deliverables; 


(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and where the 
applicant will place the marking; 


(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID Identity; and 


(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 


(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of why the 
exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking requirements 
would: 


(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where independence or 
neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The applicant must identify the USAID 
Development Objective, Interim Result, or program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or 
state why an aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, 
examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 


(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations whose data 
or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must explain why each particular deliverable 


must be seen as credible. 


(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, policies, studies, 
assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service announcements, or other 
communications. The applicant must explain why each particular item or product is better positioned as 
host-country government item or product. 


(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item or commodity 
would impair its functionality. 

 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would not be cost 
beneficial or practical. 

 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must identify the 
relevant norm and explain why marking would violate that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 


(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international law violated 
by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will approve 
or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 

applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved exemptions, 
will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, and will apply for the 
term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

[END OF PRE-AWARD TERM] 

j) Funding Restrictions 

 

USAID policy is not to award profit under assistance instruments. However, all reasonable, allocable and 
allowable expenses, both direct and indirect, which are related to the agreement program and are in 
accordance with applicable cost principle under 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. of the Uniform Administrative 
Requirements may be paid under the anticipated award. 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance 
in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit written 
approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that will be 
reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code specified in 
Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 
228. 


k) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 

 

 a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the competitive 
award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of 
interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal considerations may compromise, or have 
the appearance of compromising, the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. Should the 
applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the application, the 
applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days following 
discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware of that 
may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this financial assistance 
award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not limited to situations in which an 
applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-public information regarding a federal 
assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the 
preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action 
upon receiving any such notification from the applicant. 

 

[END OF PRE-AWARD TERM] 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the applicants 
should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all applications will be 
evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and prescribed by 
the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a Selection Committee 
(SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 

 

Applications will be reviewed to ensure they have met all the required elements as set forth in Section D 
to be determined by the Agreement Officer to be responsive to the NOFO. The application must be 
directly responsive to the terms, conditions, guidelines, and provisions of this NOFO to be assured for 
consideration. Applications not conforming to this NOFO may be categorized as not meeting the 
minimum requirements of the Government, thereby eliminating them from further consideration. USAID 
will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions and meet the 
eligibility requirements of this NOFO. 

 

a. Merit Review 

 

USAID will conduct a merit-based review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following criteria 
shown in descending order of importance (e.g., technical approach is more important than management 
approach and staffing plan). 

 

Criterion 

Description 

Technical Approach 

The extent to which the applicant’s proposed technical approach 
comprehensively describes evidence-based, realistic, and sustainable 
approaches which will achieve the goal and objective(s) specified in the 
Program Description. 

Management Approach 
and Staffing Plan 

The extent to which the proposed management approach and staffing 
plan demonstrates the clear potential to facilitate the achievement of the 
Activity’s scope and objectives including a sound, realistic management 
structure and staffing plan; the complementarity of skills of all long-term 
in-country, home office, and sub-partner technical personnel; and a 
sound approach to engaging partnerships, clearly defining the value that 
each partner brings. 

Organizational 
Capacity 

The extent to which the applicant demonstrates experience in 
implementing similar programs of comparable scale and complexity. 



 

b. Business Review 

 


The Agency will evaluate the Cost Application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award as a 
result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the 
cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial aspects of 
the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; (2) whether 
the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable economy and efficiency; and 
(3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be included in the award. 

 

If proposed, cost share will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 200.306, 2 
CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. entities, or the Standard 
Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient has the 
necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial resources, and 
technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply 
with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will 
decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

c. Co-Creation Process 

 

After the evaluation of the applications USAID may invite the highest-rated applicant to continue onto 
the co-creation phase. During this phase, the applicant may work one-on-one with USAID technical 
teams and possibly other stakeholders. 

 

The goals of co-creation sessions will be to jointly modify and refine the Program Description submitted 
by the applicant, as well as to discuss management details, including proposed key personnel and staffing 
plans. 

 

The co-creation session(s) may take place online or in-person. Any pre-award costs associated and 
incurred by the selected applicant will not be reimbursed by USAID. 

 

Based on the outcomes of the co-creation phase, USAID can decide to request the applicant(s) to submit 
the revised Technical and Cost Applications. USAID may decide that co-creation is not successful, in 
which case, the apparently successful applicant will be notified that the process is terminated, and 
USAID will begin discussions with the next highest ranked applicant. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 

 

A notice of award signed by the AO is the authorizing document for the award resulting from this NOFO. 
USAID will provide it electronically to the authorized individual identified by the Recipient in the 
application. 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been appropriated, 
allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID anticipates that these 
procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby notified of these requirements 
and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the 
Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be 
incurred before receipt of either a fully executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the 
Agreement Officer. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

 

The award will be administered as follows: 

 

Agreement Office: 

Acquisition and Assistance Office 

USAID/Uzbekistan 

3 Moyqorghon Street, 5th Block, 

Yunusobod District, 100093 Tashkent 

 

Technical Office: 

Health Development Office 

USAID/Uzbekistan 

3 Moyqorghon Street, 5th Block, 

Yunusobod District, 100093 Tashkent 

 

For U.S. organizations ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For non-U.S. organizations, Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations will 
apply. 

 

See Annex 2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting from this 
NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements. 

 

The Recipient must provide the following reports to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and 

to the Agreement Officer at AlmatyAAReporting@usaid.gov, as specified below, in accordance with 

2 CFR 200.328 and 200.327 and the Substantial Involvement provisions. 

 

a. Financial Reporting: 


 

The Recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a quarterly basis within 30 calendar 
days after the end of each USG fiscal quarter (i.e. October 30, January 30, April 30, July 30) via 
electronic format to the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), with a copy to the Agreement 
Officer at AlmatyAAReporting@usaid.gov and the USAID/CA Office of Financial Management at 
CARInvoices@usaid.gov. 

 

The Recipient must submit the electronic version of all final financial reports to USAID/CA/FMO, the 
Agreement Officer, and the AOR. The Recipient must submit the final financial report no later than 90 
calendar days from the end of the agreement. 

 

Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: www.grants.gov. 

 

b. Performance Reporting: 

 

i. Annual Implementation Plans: 

 

Within ninety days (90) of the effective date of the award of the Cooperative Agreement, the Recipient 
must develop and submit the first annual implementation plan to the AOR. Implementation plans may be 
submitted electronically. 

 

Upon acceptance of the implementation plan by the AOR, any substantial revisions to the plan must 
require the written approval of the AOR. Annual implementation plans for subsequent years are due to 
the AOR 30 days prior to the end of the USG’s fiscal year or approximately August 31st. Regardless of 
the start date of this award, implementation plans will be adjusted to the fiscal calendar of October 1- 
September 30. 

 

The Recipient must ensure that the implementation plan appropriately reflects activity objectives and the 
program description. The implementation plan should detail the work to be accomplished during the 
upcoming year. All implementation plan activities must be within the scope of the award. The annual 
implementation plan will serve as a guide for activity implementation–a demonstration of links between 
interventions and objectives in accordance with the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan. 
The annual implementation plan must outline key activities and the expected results to be accomplished 
for that year and will be negotiated and shared with key stakeholders for comments as appropriate. The 
annual implementation plan will also serve as a basis for budget estimates for that year of program 
implementation. A budget with sufficient detail to allow the AOR to judge the efficiency of the 
implementation plan should be included. The AWP should delineate an overall budget by line item and a 
budget per objective and activity. The AWP may be revised on an occasional basis in the course of 
implementation, as needed, to reflect changes on the ground with the concurrence of the AOR. 

 

The Recipient’s Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) approach may entail periods of 
reflection/assessment that lead to significant changes to the implementation plan in such areas as policy 
focus, approaches, etc. In these instances, the AWP may be revised in the course of implementation, as 
needed, to reflect changes on the ground only with the concurrence of the AOR. 

 

The annual implementation plans must also highlight how gender will be effectively addressed in the 
activity, using learning and information from the initial gender analysis and subsequent implementation. 
This includes ensuring the following areas are captured as they relate to gender: 


 

● Prioritize recommendations and action items 

● Highlight key stakeholders in implementation and plans for outreach to stakeholders 

● Training and capacity development plan for staff and targeted beneficiaries 

● A description of tools to be developed or used; and 

● Any other content the implementing partner deems pertinent. 

If appropriate, the Recipient can highlight for USAID work or research that the implementing partner 
feels would further the cause of gender integration and social inclusion but is not within the scope of the 
current award. 

 

ii. Quarterly/Annual Performance Reports: 

 

The Recipient will use the standard form Performance Progress Report (SF-PPR) to report performance 
progress for the program under the award. Reports may be submitted electronically. Regardless of the 
start date of the cooperative agreement all reporting will be adjusted to the USG fiscal year calendar. 

 

Quarterly Reports: The Recipient must submit quarterly reports that include narratives of quarterly 
achievements, and progress against the work plan and agreed-upon performance indicators. A format for 
the quarterly report must be approved by the AOR on an annual basis. The Recipient must submit 
quarterly reports within thirty (30) calendar days of the end of each quarter. The following quarter end 
dates must be used to determine the date of submission off the quarterly reports: 3/31, 6/30, 9/30, or 
12/31. The fourth quarter report must be drafted as an annual report and must cover activities of the 
quarter as well as overall assessment of performance and progress for the prior 12 months of the program 
(See Annual Reports below). 

 

The quarterly report must describe and assess the overall progress to date based upon agreed performance 
indicators. The reports must also describe the accomplishments of the Recipient and the progress made 
during the past quarter and will include information on key activities, both ongoing and completed during 
the quarter (e.g. meetings, trainings, workshops, significant events, subcontracts, and grants). The 
quarterly report should include targets and results for each indicator agreed upon in the MEL Plan. The 
quarterly report provides the opportunity to discuss impacts of learning on the program; for example, 
how has implementation evolved as the result of information gathered over the course of the quarter? 
Also, notification must be given in the case of problems, delays, or adverse conditions which materially 
impair the ability to meet the objectives of the award or which may have an impact on the development 
hypothesis or theory of change for the activity, and/or other activities (USG-funded or not) which might 
be informed by such learning. This notification must include a statement of the action taken or 
contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve the situation. Lastly, the quarterly report will outline 
how the project has collaborated with host country governments and other USG and other donor funded 
projects and efforts. The quarterly reports must utilize photos, maps, tables and other graphical elements 
useful in communicating performance data and activity implementation and include at least one success 
story. Any outreach or press reporting about the activity must also be included. 

 

Annual Reports: The Recipient must submit annual reports that include narratives of achievements, and 
progress against the work plan and agreed-upon performance indicators. A format for the annual report 


must be approved by the AOR on an annual basis. The Recipient must submit annual reports within thirty 
(30) calendar days of the end of each U.S. Government fiscal year. Annual reports should contain content 
appropriate for public dissemination. In addition to content summarizing performance from the 
preceding quarter (See Quarterly Report above), the Annual Report must include a section that 
summarizes performance from the preceding year. The annual summary must concentrate on outcome 
and impact based on agreed upon performance indicators. It will report on annual achievements against 
targets and will account for any shortfalls. The analysis in the annual section must not be limited to 
performance measures – it will also summarize progress during the previous year in a qualitative fashion. 
To this end, the Annual Report must also utilize photos, maps, tables, and other graphical elements useful 
in summarizing project performance from the past year. In addition, the annual report must include a 
professionally formatted, four-to eight pages annual summary of achievements, noteworthy activities, 
lessons learned, changes in the environment, etc. The summary must be formatted to function as a standalone, 
externally shareable document, designed to keep key project stakeholders (such as USG agencies, 
other donors, and other USG implementers) up to date on progress. The summary must include photos, 
maps, tables, and other graphical elements as relevant. The annual summary must not directly recycle 
text, photos or other elements from quarterly summaries. 

 

As Part of Quarterly Performance reporting, the Recipient will address the following: 

 

Development, Outreach and Communication: 

 

The Recipient will be requested to provide the following information: 

 

● Activity fact sheets, to be updated and submitted to USAID on a specified USAID template 
twice/year or at the request of USAID. 

 

● An updated quarterly list of public events to be organized by the Recipient during the upcoming 
three months, including approximate date, location, and audience. The Recipient will coordinate 
with USAID about all planned events with press participation, press activities, press releases, as 
well as inclusion of USAID promotional materials for the participants, participation of USAID or 
USG representatives. 

 

● Two success stories a year with an accompanying photograph (see item c. for specifications). The 
success stories will be provided in a Word Document format, using a standard USAID success 
story template. 

 

● The fourth quarterly performance report must also include a digital collection of at least 20 highresolution 
(at least 300 pixels per inch (ppi)) professional photographs a year that are illustrative 
of project’s achievements. The photographs will comply with a guidance provided in the USAID 
Graphic Standards Manual. Each photograph will have a brief explanation about its subject and 
identify: the author and his/her organization, person(s) featured in the photograph, and the 
location where the photograph was taken. 

 

● Clippings of and/or web links to, press articles that mention the activity or its interventions. 

 

● An electronic and/or print copy of all communications materials produced by the activity on a 
quarterly basis. 


● Once a year, the activity will present a summary of all publicity events and received media 
coverage. 

● The Recipient will upload to USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) all 
appropriate activity materials. Materials that can be uploaded to DEC include quarterly and final 
reports, publications, brochures, evaluations, photos, among others. The DEC serves as a 
searchable repository of all USAID related publications going back decades. If necessary, 
uploaded materials can be restricted so that they can only be accessed by USAID staff (however, 
to the extent possible, we hope to keep materials publicly accessible). As part of the annual work 
plan process an annual communications plan indicating key milestones, events and 
communications tools and approaches to be used. This will include a communications calendar 
that will state the proposed timing for major events. As per USAID/Central Asia’s guidelines, the 
activity will give at least four-weeks advance notice of all public events that include the press 
and/or senior U.S. Government participation and inform the AOR and USAID DOC team 
accordingly. 

 

TEAMS and USAID Sponsored J-1 Visas: All host country nationals being funded fully, partially, 
directly, or indirectly by USAID must enter the U.S. on a J-1 Visa, regardless of the type or duration of 
the activity. In order to secure a J-1 visa, each participant must first secure a DS-2019 form (Certificate of 
Eligibility for Exchange Visitor J-1 Status). TEAMS is the only means of obtaining a DS-2019 for 
USAID-funded Exchange Visitors. 

 

USAID/Uzbekistan delegates the TEAMS data entry, verification, and reporting responsibilities to its 
implementing partner who is responsible for data entry (the R1 role) and verification (the R2 role) of all 
training programs and participants that are funded by USAID. 

 

USAID/Uzbekistan is responsible for approval (the R3 role) and the CORs/AORs and program managers 
are responsible for working with their implementing partners to obtain the data needed by the R3. 
USAID/Washington is responsible for submission of the data (the R4 role) to SEVIS. The DS-2019 
approval process is as follows: 

 

● Data is entered into TEAMS by the implementing partner’s Data Entry Initiator (R1) for initiating 
visa applications and tracking the participants in TEAMS; 

● The R1 submits the information to the Visa Compliance System (VCS); 

● The designated Verifier (R2) verifies the accuracy of the data in the VCS, and either submits the 
information to the R3 if all is correct, or rejects the file if there are errors in the data; 

● A designated United States citizen in the USAID Mission – the Approver (R3) – reviews the 
electronic versions of documents in TEAMS and either approves or rejects the files (for missing 
data or other concerns based on review of the files) sending them back to the R1 with comments; 

● When the R3 approves a file, the information is electronically transferred to the Responsible 
Officer (R4) in USAID/Washington who provides the final approval before the information is 
submitted to the Department of Homeland Security SEVIS database for processing; 

 

● The DS-2019 form is created, printed and mailed to the Responsible Officer in the Mission; 

 


● The Responsible Officer gives the form to the USAID COR or AOR who provides it to the 
implementing partner. The implementing partner is responsible for delivering the form to the 
participant so that he/she can present it to the Consular Officer during their appointment for a J-1 
visa at the U.S. Embassy consular section, or designated Consulate. Exchange visitors apply 
online at the U.S. State Department’s website in Uzbekistan. 

● When asked to enter a “Program Number”, applications should enter USAID’s Exchange Visitor 
Program Number G-2-00263. 

 
Gender Reporting: Annual activity reports must include a specific gender section with the following 
explanations: 

• Summary of the implementing partner’s accomplishments in achieving specific gender-related 
results and conclusions about areas that could need future support. 

• Overall description of all gender-related activities. 

• Achievement of results, intermediate-results, outputs, and/or targets for all gender related 
indicators, disaggregated by sex, with specific discussion of improvements in previously 
identified gender disparities and inequalities. 

• Difficulties or challenges encountered in the implementation of gender-related activities. 

• Recommendations for sustainability of the gender-related activities after the activity has ended. 

• Documentation on lessons learned and best practices, including identification of new 
opportunities for men and women that were created, what negative impacts were addressed or 
avoided, and what needs and gender inequalities emerged or remain. 

 

 iii. Final Report: 

 

The Recipient must submit a final report that summarizes achievements, and progress against the work 
plan and agreed-upon performance indicators over the life of the project. The Recipient must submit the 
Final Report within ninety (90) calendar days after the expiration of the award. The Final Report must 
contain content appropriate for public dissemination. The Final Report must contain the following 
information: 

 

1. An executive summary of the accomplishments and results achieved; 

2. An in-depth analysis of progress and results that synthesizes achievements that contributed 
towards program objectives. This section must clearly describe activities, major accomplishments, and 
results achieved, including results for all of the activities under the Cooperative Agreement; 

3. Describe reasons why targets were not achieved or were surpassed and why activities were 
delayed or not carried out, if appropriate; 

4. A summary of problems/obstacles encountered during the implementation, and how those 
obstacles were addressed and overcome, if appropriate; 

5. Success stories, including examples of synergy and collaboration with partners; 

6. Lessons learned, best practices, and other findings, along with recommendations for future 
programming in this sector; 

7. A summary of progress made in achieving indicator targets during the activity implementation 
(based on valid data collection and analysis and credible baseline) including final data, compared to 
baseline data, for all indicators included in the monitoring and evaluation plan. This section should 
include disaggregated data by gender, historically disenfranchised groups, and other relevant groups 
identified; 

8. A comparison of actual expenditures with budget estimates, including analysis and explanation of 
cost overruns or high unit costs, as relevant; 


9. Other pertinent information, including recommendations with-in depth- analysis and lessons 
learned, related to the overall activity results; 

10. The Final Report must also contain an index of all reports and information products produced 
under the award; and 

11. The Final Report must include a professionally formatted, four-to-eight page annual summary of 
achievements, noteworthy activities, lessons learned, changes in the environment, etc. The Report must 
be formatted to function as a stand-alone, externally shareable document, designed to keep key project 
stakeholders (such as USG agencies, other donors, and other USG implementers) up to date on progress. 
The Final Report must include photos, maps, tables, and other graphical elements as relevant. The Final 
Report must not directly recycle text, photos or other elements from Annual Reports. 

 

4. Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements 

 

Consistent with ADS 540, the Recipient must prepare and submit a copy of semi-annual and final 
performance reports, results of assessments and operational research, if any, required by this award to the 
USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) at: 

 Online: https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/submit.aspx; 

By Mail: 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

 

Essential bibliographic information must accompany submissions, whenever it is available. The 
submission page on the DEC identifies the minimum required fields to submit. For questions on DEC 
submissions, contact: 

 Email: ksc@usaid.gov 

 Telephone: +1 202-712-0579 

 

*Note: Mail sent to USAID via the US Postal Service undergoes security and irradiation processing. To 
send sensitive items, like CDs or DVDs, please contact the DEC team at ksc@usaid.gov to arrange 
delivery. 

 

5. Program Income 

 

USAID does not anticipate any program income under the award. Should there be any program income, 
the Recipient shall account for it in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307. Program income earned under this 
award shall be added to the project. 

6. Key Personnel 

 

The list of Key Personnel: 

 

Chief of Party 

 


Chief of Party (CoP) is responsible for the overall management and operations of the activity. This 
includes providing strategic leadership, management and administration as well as representation. She/he 
will supervise activity implementation and ensure the activity meets stated Objectives and reporting 
requirements, including all outreach communications requirements. The CoP will take a leadership role 
in coordination among USAID, MOH, and other implementing partners. S/he shall have depth and 
breadth of technical expertise and experience, a solid professional reputation, interpersonal skills and 
professional relationships to fulfill the requirements of the activity description. 

 

The COP must have the following: 

● A Masters’ degree or higher in degree in public health, health administration, medicine, 
epidemiology, infectious diseases, health systems, health economics or health financing is preferred. 

● Minimum 7 years of prior Chief or Party (COP)/Country Director or Deputy CD/COP Activity 
Management Expertise, with international Tuberculosis or other infectious diseases activities of similar 
size and complexity. Prior expertise leading USAID activities is desirable. 

● The CoP should have 8-10 years of increasing service delivery expertise in a health country 
setting comparable to that of Uzbekistan as a public health advisor or program manager, with both 
clinical treatment and care expertise and health systems strengthening experience. 

● Demonstrated experience in leading diverse teams, including remote leadership, is required as the 
CoP will lead a multidisciplinary team across multiple components comprised of technical and 
administrative staff that may be based in multiple locations across the country. 

● Prior expertise in high level health policy negotiations and substantial prior donor collaboration 
and representational duties is required. 

● Demonstrated ability to work with host government health officials (national and sub-national 
levels); local civil society; and private sector strongly desired. 

● Excellent representational and communication skills, written and oral proficiency in English. 

● Excellent past performance references 

● Prior expertise in post Soviet Union context in a senior management capacity on donor financed 
programs is strongly desired. 

● Experience working with USG supported projects and knowledge of financial rules and 
regulations at a senior level is strongly preferred. 

Strategic Communications and Outreach Advisor leads development and implementation of all TB 
prevention and awareness communications and outreach products and deliverables. 

 

The Strategic Communications and Outreach Advisor must have the following: 

 

● Minimum Bachelor's degree in health communications or mass communications, social 
marketing, or journalism with health or behavior change focus. 

● Minimum five years experience in health behavior change communication program design, 
implementation and management. 

● Demonstrated understanding of theories and best strategic behavior change practices relating to 
individual behavior change and broader social responses. 

● At least three years experience working in an international or resource challenged setting. 
Experience working with mass media and communications campaigns in former Soviet context is highly 
desirable. 

● Strong project management skills 


● Experience working with influential figures/celebrities to advocate and champion for social 
change a desired plus. 

 

Deputy Chief of Party (Operations and Finance lead) 

The Deputy Chief of Party (Operations and Finance lead) works closely with the COP. S/he acts for the 
COP as needed, and carries out any other tasks assigned by the COP to ensure proper management of the 
activity. The DCOP is responsible for all management and operations of TB Free Uzbekistan. 

The Deputy Chief of Party (Operations and Finance lead) must have the following: 

 

● Master’s degree in public health, health administration, business administration, health systems, 
health economics or health financing is preferred. 

● Should have 5 years of progressively responsible and relevant professional experience in health 
program design and management, with a focus on infectious diseases. 

● Senior management level Activity Management (administration, strategic planning, 
implementation and reporting) Expertise, with international Tuberculosis or other infectious disease 
activities of similar size and complexity. 

● Prior expertise in high level health policy negotiations and substantial prior donor collaboration 
and representational duties is required. 

● Demonstrated ability to work with host government health officials (national and sub-national 
levels); local civil society; and private sector strongly desired. 

● Excellent representational and communication skills, written and oral proficiency in English. 

 

7. Environmental Compliance 

 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of AID’s activities 
on the environment be considered, and that USAID include environmental sustainability as central 
consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. This mandate is codified in 
Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS), Chapters 201 
and 204, which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities 
are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. The Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these regulations 
and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this Agreement. In addition to complying 
with the obligations below, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations 
unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 
regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under this award will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a Request 
for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), Environmental Assessment 
(EA) or Environmental Review Checklist (ERC) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer 
(BEO). A Memo to the File (MTF) 6 (Asia-19-009-MTF-6) to Programmatic Health IEE (P-IEE) Asia 
19-009, covering the Tuberculosis (TB) Free Uzbekistan, was approved by the BEO/Asia on September 
12, 2022, valid through FY 2025. 

 

USAID has determined that almost all project activities (90-95%) for technical assistance, training 
programs except to the extent such programs include activities directly affecting the environment (such as 


construction of facilities, etc.); analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings; and 
document and information transfers qualify for a Categorical Exclusion (CE) under 22 CFR Part 
216.2(c)(2) (no effect on the natural or physical environment) and, therefore, these activities are excluded 
from further environmental review and reporting to USAID. For activities qualifying for a Negative 
Determination with Conditions (NDC), such as for example small construction and renovation and/or 
procurement of medical equipment, conducting medical tests, providing policy and technical 
recommendations, strategic plans and regulatory and legal changes, limited procurement of electric and 
electronic equipment, commodities and materials and other small renovations, the Recipient must screen, 
mitigate, monitor, and report to USAID in accordance with terms established in MTF 6. All activity 
components are rated as low climate risk as they are not expected to materially affect the implementation 
or outcomes of the activity. Additional climate risk screening should be conducted for activities with 
NDC by the Recipient as required in P-IEE Asia 19-009. 

 

As part of its Implementation Plan, and all Annual Implementation Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR), the Regional Mission Environmental 
Officer, and Climate Integration Lead, will review all ongoing and planned activities under this award to 
determine if they are within the scope of the approved 22 Reg. 216 environmental documentation. If the 
recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of MTF 6, it must assist the AOR to prepare another 
MTF or P-IEE amendment for USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken 
prior to receiving written USAID approval of the MTF or P-IEE amendment. Any on-going activities 
found to be outside the scope of the approved 22 Reg. 216 environmental documentation must be halted 
until an amendment to the documentation is submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

 

For any activities with Negative Determination of Conditions as indicated in MTF 6, USAID anticipates 
that implementing required conditions and mitigation measures that apply to actions under this agreement 
and otherwise complying with applicable environmental requirements will require environmental 
compliance and management expertise. Respondents to the RFA must therefore include as part of their 
application their approach to achieving environmental compliance and management to include: 

-- The applicant’s approach to developing and implementing an EMMP, activity/site-specific ERC and 
other required documentation. 

-- The applicant’s approach to providing necessary environmental management expertise, including 
examples of past experience of environmental management of similar activities. 

-- The applicant’s illustrative budget for implementing the environmental compliance activities, including 
screening, mitigation, monitoring and reporting. For the purpose of this solicitation, applicants should 
reflect illustrative costs for environmental compliance implementation and monitoring in their cost 
application. 

 

8. Performance Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 

 

The Recipient is required to develop and implement monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) plan that 
is consistent with ADS 201, in consultation with the AOR, and, as appropriate, with the Mission MEL 
Specialist. The MEL plan shall cover the life of award. Annual MEL Plan development is NOT 
recommended. However, the Recipient should review the MEL plan annually to ensure that it is still 
valid. If, over the course of implementation, modifications to the MEL plan become necessary, changes 
to the MEL plan shall be proposed to the AOR. Once approved by the AOR, the Recipient will then 
amend the MEL plan to reflect those changes and document clearly the changes as approved. If 
modified, the MEL plan shall not exclude data previously collected, and, to the extent possible, shall 
mitigate any significant variations in data collection methodology, indicator definition, or data 


presentation. The intent of the MEL plan is to show changes over time as a result of USAID 
intervention. 

 

The MEL plan will be guided by the activity’s goal and objectives, anticipated results articulated in the 
results framework, the theory of change, and planned inputs/interventions as laid out in the annual work 
plan. The MEL plan will also serve as a tool of mutual understanding among all involved parties (e.g. 
USAID, the Recipient, Subrecipient (if any) and other stakeholders) on stakeholders’ MEL roles and 
responsibilities and how the achievements of this award will be measured and presented. Routine MEL 
tasks and reports will give the Recipient and USAID/Uzbekistan a basis for gauging performance and 
return on investment, promoting learning, and facilitating adaptive management to allow activity 
adjustment due to unforeseen changes in strategy, approach, or operating environment that may be 
needed to achieve or maximize results. The MEL plan must, therefore, articulate clearly the link to the 
results framework and the theory of change of the award; identify how key assumptions in the theory of 
change would be tested or validated over the course of implementation; clearly define the high quality 
indicators to be reported to USAID (see below); and contain practical, feasible, and cost-effective 
methodologies to accomplish the tasks laid out in the MEL plan. 

 

The MEL plan will be submitted to the AOR for approval within 45 days of the award and is separate 
from the implementation plan and regular financial and other reports required by the standard 
clauses. The MEL plan and its annexes should be finalized before major implementations begin, and 
prior to the first indicator data is being collected. 

 

Performance Monitoring 

 

The MEL plan shall follow contents and instructions as specified in the USAID/CA MEL Plan 
Template*. At minimum, the MEL plan shall be accompanied by two annexes: an indicator tracking 
table* (ITT) and indicator reference sheets (IRSs). The ITT will contain a list of all indicators with 
appropriate disaggregations to be tracked and reported to USAID/Uzbekistan. The Recipient is 
encouraged to use quantitative as well as qualitative indicators as deemed appropriate for the result it is 
intended to measure. The ITT will be submitted to the AOR according to the reporting timeline specified 
in the award. To the extent possible, and with AOR approval, baseline data should be collected prior to 
intervention inputs. 

 

It is highly recommended that the MEL plan include no more than 10 indicators; i.e., those at the higher 
level results or at the output level and above, rather than all indicators that the Recipient uses for its 
internal management. When selecting indicators, the Recipient should take into consideration the 
relevance and accuracy of the indicators according to the planned tasks/services and intended results, as 
well as time and resources required to collect and report each indicator data. All selected indicators must 
be in line with the activity as well as the Mission-wide Performance Management Plan (PMP). The 
existing U.S. Foreign Assistance Standard Indicators and/or those of the US Government’s Initiatives, the 
Mission’s Regional Development and Cooperation Strategy, and other relevant IRSs shall be used as 
applicable1. 

1 The latest list of Standard Indicators will be provided by AOR after the award is signed. 

*The templates will be provided by AOR after the award is signed. 

 

A separate IRS* is to be developed independently for each indicator as per the template and instructions 
provided. If a qualitative indicator is used it must also be accompanied by a IRS. If a qualitative 


indicator is used it must also be accompanied by a IRS. If a Standard Foreign Assistance Indicator is 
used a standard definition must also be used. The Recipient may add a “precise definition” to the 
standard definition to further elaborate inclusion and exclusion criteria specific to the nature of the 
activity as needed. However, the precise definition must be within the scope of the standard definition. If 
the selected standard or custom indicators are the same as those being used in activity and/or the PMP, 
the same standard IRSs shall be used so that the results can be aggregated at USAID/Uzbekistan 
level. As applicable, all indicators shall be disaggregated by geographical locations at the Administrative 
1 (province or state) level. All people indicators must be disaggregated by sex and include other metrics 
that allow the full capture of effect on gender equality and women’s economic empowerment. 

All performance indicators are required to have baseline data. Baseline data should be collected before the 
start of the implementation that is expected to lead to a result (output or outcome) measured by that 
performance indicator. If baseline data cannot be collected until later in the course of an activity, the 
indicator’s IRS should document when and how the baseline data will be collected. 

 

USAID/Uzbekistan will conduct a data quality assessment (DQA) of the indicators that are to be reported 
to Washington, DC, as soon as each required indicator data is being collected and reported to the 
Mission. The Mission may conduct the DQA on other indicators as deemed appropriate. 

 

USAID/Uzbekistan works to deploy Development Information Systems, which will serve as a repository 
for all performance indicators, including baseline values and timeframes, targets, and rationales for 
targets and actual values. Once DIS is deployed, the awardees will be required to enter baseline, target 
and actual data directly. USAID will provide training and necessary support to contractor’s MEL staff. 
The AOR will clear data prior to the awardee inputting the data and review the data submitted to ensure 
accuracy. 

 

Routine monitoring is not all about tracking and reporting numbers against the selected indicators. The 
Recipient should use appropriate means, mechanisms, and tools to assess the level of performance 
beyond tracing numbers; capture any unintended positive results and the factors contributing to such 
results; and examine any unintended negative consequences or results of the implementation, especially 
those that could affect the safety of beneficiaries or their equitable access to the services. All these 
should be well documented and shared with the AOR. USAID staff may pay visits to the implementation 
sites at any time during the life of the award. 

 

Evaluation 

 

The USG funding shall not be used for any studies that do not meet USAID and/or international 
standards, are not necessary or have no added value to maximize the outcomes or results, and/or have no 
clear objectives and a plan for data use. The Recipient may conduct special studies, such as internal 
evaluations2, formative assessment, and baseline and endline surveys, as deemed necessary. The studies 
shall be planned and their purposes, methods, and intended use of the findings and recommendations be 
precisely described in a relevant section of the MEL plan. The study concept/protocol and the scope of 
work or terms of reference of the study team should be shared with the AOR and AOR clearance shall be 
obtained prior to implementation. 

2 Either by the Recipient’s or subRecipient’s staff or outsourced Recipient or consultant. See definition in ADS 201. 

 

At any time of award, USAID/Uzbekistan may conduct one or more evaluation(s), either by USAID staff 
and/or a third party external to USAID and the Recipient, as deemed appropriate. This is mainly to 


generate strategic information and learning opportunities that can inform program management and to 
strengthen current programming and/or to support design of future activities; measure progress and/or 
achievement of intended/unintended higher level outcomes; and account for the investments and 
demonstrate their effectiveness and/or impact. The Recipient must work closely with and provide 
essential support to USAID and/or external evaluators as requested. 

 

Learning 

 

The Recipient shall concisely describe the plan for adaptive learning in the MEL plan. This section shall 
explain the activity’s approach to learning from monitoring data, evaluation findings (if applicable), data 
presentation, and other learning activities, and how it will be adapted in response to new learning and 
knowledge, especially how the lessons can be applied to the USAID program cycle. Learning also 
includes creating case studies, best practices, and communications pieces to share internally to USAID 
and externally to partners and stakeholders. 

 

Inclusive Development 

 

USAID intends for the activity to be subject to rigorous monitoring and evaluation, to: a) ensure the 
intended results are being generated; b) inform activity management if and when course corrections may 
be necessary; c) ensure the interventions are targeting the right groups; and d) capture diverse 
perspectives from stakeholders; and e) monitor the context. In accordance with Automated Directives 
System (ADS) 201, achieving results outlined in a project through the implementation of a set of 
activities is a continuous process. Monitoring efforts should include ongoing consultations and other 
forms of direct communication with marginalized groups (such as, but not limited to, indigenous peoples, 
LGBTQI+ people, persons with disabilities, religious/ethnic minorities, women/girls, youth) to gauge 
their perception of programming as well as program impacts. A detailed M&E design will be developed 
subsequent to the award and will include appropriate Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators (F 
indicators), as well as custom indicators. 

 

9. Electronic Payments System 

 

1. Definitions: 

 

a. “Cash Payment System” means a payment system that generates any transfer of funds through a 
transaction originated by cash, check, or similar paper instrument. This includes electronic payments to a 
financial institution or clearing house that subsequently issues cash, check, or similar paper instrument to 
the designated payee. 

 

b. “Electronic Payment System” means a payment system that generates any transfer of funds, other 
than a transaction originated by cash, check, or similar paper instrument, that is initiated through an 
electronic terminal, telephone, mobile phone, computer, or magnetic tape, for the purpose of ordering, 
instructing or authorizing a financial institution to debit or credit an account. The term includes debit 
cards, wire transfers, transfers made at automatic teller machines, and point-of-sale terminals. 

 

2. The Recipient agrees to use an electronic payment system for any payments under this award to 
beneficiaries, subrecipients, or contractors. 

 

3. Exceptions. Recipients are allowed the following exceptions, provided the Recipient documents 


its files with the appropriate justification: 

 

a. Cash payments made while establishing electronic payment systems, provided that this exception 
is not used for more than six months from the effective date of this award. 

 

b. Cash payments made to payees where the Recipient does not expect to make payments to the 
same payee on a regular, recurring basis, and payment through an electronic payment system is not 
reasonably available. 

 

c. Cash payments to vendors below $3000, when payment through an electronic payment system is 
not reasonably available. 

 

d. The Recipient has received a written exception from the Agreement Officer that a specific 
payment or all cash payments are authorized based on the Recipient’s written justification, which 
provides a basis and cost analysis for the requested exception. 

 

4. More information about how to establish, implement, and manage electronic payment methods is 
available to Recipients at http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/programs/c2e-toolkit. 

 

10. Police and Prisons 

 

Under this award, assistance may not be used to provide training, advice, or any financial support for 
police, prisons, or other law enforcement forces. 

 

11. Salary Supplemental for Host Government Employees 

 

Any payments by the Recipient to any host government’s employee at any level is subject to the 

USAID policy guidance on criteria for payment of salary supplements for host government employees 
dated April 1988 (or as amended). When this issue arises during the life of the cooperative agreement, the 
Recipient must consult with the AO on any questions regarding the applicability of the policy. 

 

12. Collection of Activity Location Data 

 

In accordance with USAID ADS 201 and ADS 579, the Recipient must plan, collect and submit 
Geographic data through the Activity Location Data based on the following requirements: 

 

At a minimum, the location(s) where the activity is implemented must be collected at the site location 
[The location of an exact site represented by the latitude/longitude coordinates of the site locations] level. 
The location of the activity’s beneficiaries also needs to be collected using the same methods and 
standards used to collect the Location of Implementation. 

 

The performance indicators for geographically disaggregated performance and/or context indicators 
should be collected as described in ADS 201 and ADS 201 Additional Help: Monitoring Data 
Disaggregation by Geographic Location, which provides additional guidance. 

 

Activity Location Data must be collected according to the standards provided by USAID in accordance 
with ADS 579. Activity Location Data must be submitted twice a year according to Agency approved 


methods. If the Activity Location Data has not changed since the previous data submission, it must be 
indicated when the data is submitted. 

 

The Activity Location Data must exclude personally identifiable information. If the Activity Location 
Data collected by the Recipient requires protection from unauthorized access to mitigate data risk, the 
Recipient must notify USAID before submitting the Activity Location Data to USAID and implement 
mitigation techniques to protect the data from unauthorized access in consultation with USAID. 

 

In addition, other geographic data assets must be submitted in accordance with the special clause or 
provision of the “Submission of Datasets to the Development Data Library (see page 7)”. Both primary 
and derived Geographic Data Files must be submitted in accordance to ADS 579 Additional Help: 
Geographic Data Collection and Submission Standards. Submissions must be reviewed by the AOR, and 
then the Recipient must submit the final Activity Location Data to the AOR. A template for standard 
submissions will be provided by the AOR, or by the GIS Team. 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS 

 

For questions please refer to Section D of this NOFO. 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

1. Award 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement Officer is 
the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. Any 
award is subject to the availability of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

2. Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used by the 
U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in 
part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made as a result of 
– or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have the right to 
duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This restriction does not 
limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from another 
source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet 
numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 

 

3. Exclusivity in Partnerships with Subrecipients 

 

Exclusivity agreements are prohibited under this NOFO. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Item # 

Cost Category 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

Year 5 

Total in 

US Dollars 

1. 

Personnel and 
Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. 

Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. 

Travel and 
Transportation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. 

Equipment & Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. 

Subawards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. 

Other 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8. 

Indirect Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9. 

Total Federal Funds 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10. 

Total Estimated 
Amount 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Note: Your organization should submit its summary budget in the above summary budget template. You 
must also submit the detailed budget for each of the cost categories with the accompanying budget 
narrative. 

 

[End of Annex 1] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 2 – STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 
and https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award will 
also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. NONGOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL (Nonprofit) 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) (DECEMBER 
2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL 
REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 

 

X 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

TBD 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY TITLE) 
(NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

X 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

 

X 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING 
(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 

X 

 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN USAID 
ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

X 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON 
LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 
2012) 

 

X 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO PROMOTE, 
SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD MANAGEMENT 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 




X 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

 

X 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

X 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
(AUGUST 2013) 

X 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER RECIPIENT 
PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND 
PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

X 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE AGREEMENT 
(NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) (JUNE 
2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD MANAGEMENT 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

X 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

X 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

X 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN USAID 
ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

X 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON 
LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 
2012) 




 

X 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO PROMOTE, 
SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL 
REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER RECIPIENT 
PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

[End of Annex 2] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 3 – INITIAL ENVIRONMENT EXAMINATION 

 

Please see a separate attachment (MTF 6 (Asia-19-009-MTF-6) to Programmatic Health IEE (P-IEE)) to 
this NOFO. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 4 – LOCAL COMPENSATION PLAN 

 

Please see a separate attachment to this NOFO. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Compensation Guideline - Uzbekistan 
Based on USAID/CA/Tashkent Compensation Plan dated 08/15/21 

RANGE (In 
U.S. Dollars) 
Middle High 
Daily Rate Daily Rate 
$227.08 $256.47 
$192.53 $217.42 
$175.37 $198.02 
$124.50 $140.50 
$107.01 $120.74 
$93.41 $105.35 
$76.72 $86.48 
$63.79 $71.89 
$57.75 $65.05 
$52.58 $59.21 
$40.70 $45.79 

USAID Low 
Levels 
USAID Position Titles USAID Contractor 
Positions 
Qualifications 
Daily Rate 
Grade 12 
Deputy Controller Sr. 
Project Management 
Specialist 
Sr. Specialist 
Head Finance 
Manager 
Head Field 
Coordinator 
Over 8 Years of Professional 
Experience and Demonstration 
Highly Advanced Skills, expert 
knowledge. 
Advanced Degree in Technical or 
Mgt. Area (additional weight is 
given to U.S. degrees) 
Policy Level Responsibility in 
Technical or Mgt. Area 
$197.70 
Grade 11 
Chief Accountant Sr. 
Project Management 
Specialist 
Sr. SpecialistHead 
Finance Manager 
Head Field 
Coordinator 
Over 7 Years of Professional 
Experience or Demonstration Highly 
Advanced Skills 
Advanced Degree in Technical or 
Mgt. Area (additional weight is 
given to U.S. degrees) 
Policy Level Responsibility in 
Technical or Mgt. Area 
$167.65 
Grade 10 
Project Mgt. Specialist; 
Computer Management; 
Specialist Chief 
Accountant 
Sr. Specialists; 
Finance Manager; 
Field Coordinator 
Over 6 Year of Professional 
Experience or Demonstration Highly 
Advanced Skills Advanced Degree 
in Technical or Mgt. Area (additional 
weight is given to U.S. degrees) 
Policy Level Responsibility in 
Technical or Mgt. Area $152.72 
Grade 9 Supervisor Administrative 
Asst.; Procurement Agent 
Office Manager 
Marketing/Economic 
etc. Specialists 
Over 5 Year Advanced Degree in 
Technical or Mgt. Area of 
Professional Experience 
Technical/Management Leadership 
in Programmatic or Operational 
Area Usually has supervisory 
responsibility $108.50 
Grade 8 Interpreter/Translator; 
Project Manager; 
Accounting Technician; 
Travel Assistant; 
Maintenance Supervisor 
Interpreter; Engineer; 
Computer Specialist; 
Other Technical 
Professionals 
Professional Degree in Technical 
Area Over 4 Year of Professional 
Experience Highly developed skills 
in technical area 
$93.28 
Grade 7 Administrative Assistant; 
Accounting Technician; 
Travel Assistant 
Accountant; 
Information 
Specialists; Sr. 
Administrative 
Assistants 
University Degree Over 3 Years of 
Professional or Administrative 
experience Management 
Responsibility for Specific Tasks 
$81.47 
Grade 6 Warehouse Storekeeper; 
Senior Office Secretary; 
Expendable Storekeeper; 
Motor Pool Supervisor 
Administrative 
Assistants 
University Degree Over 3 years of 
professional or administrative 
experience Responsibility for 
Specific Tasks 
$66.95 
Grade 5 Secretary, Personnel 
Clerk 
Jr. Administrative 
Assistants; Jr. 
Interpreters 
University Degree with no 
professional experience Currently in 
college No college with 5 years of 
experience $55.70 
Grade 4 Electrician; Carpenter; 
Plumber; Receptionist 
Electrician; Carpenter; 
Other Skilled Labor 
5 years of experience in skills area 
$50.44 
Grade 3 Chauffeur Drivers Proven driving experience with 
reliable automobile $45.94 
Grade 1 Cleaning woman Cook Proven skills to cook or clean $35.60 

annual BS Meal Allowance 
step 1 step 6 step 11 $450.00 
$50,951.00 $58,591.00 $66,231.00 
$43,139.00 $49,609.00 $56,079.00 
$39,256.00 $45,146.00 $51,036.00 
$27,759.00 $31,919.00 $36,079.00 
$23,802.00 $27,372.00 $30,942.00 
$20,731.00 $23,836.00 $26,941.00 
$16,956.00 $19,496.00 $22,036.00 
$14,031.00 $16,136.00 $18,241.00 
$12,664.00 $14,564.00 $16,464.00 
$11,495.00 $13,220.00 $14,945.00 
$8,806.00 $10,131.00 $11,456.00 


