 

Issuance date: …………………… July 22, 2022 

Due date for written Questions: … August 9, 2022, 17:00 hours, Addis Ababa Time 

Closing date: …………………… September 5, 2022 at 17:00 hours, AddisAbaba Time 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) No.: 72060322RFA00002 

 

Program Title: USAID/Djibouti Youth Employment (YE) Activity 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development’s (USAID) Mission in Djibouti 
(USAID/Djibouti) is seeking applications for a cooperative agreement from qualified entities 
to implement the USAID/Djibouti Youth Employment (YE) Activity, subject to the availability 
of funds. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

 

The Total Estimated Amount (TEA) of the activity is 16 million dollars over a four year period. 
In addition, the CISCO Network Academy will provide O/A $3 million of capacity building 
activity as in-kind contribution for interventions in the ICT space. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this 
funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of activity sought, application submission 
requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted 
on www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly 
check the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 

 

USAID/Djibouti bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or 
conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the 
NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.7. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, 
applicants are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 


Co-Creation: To build self-reliance and ensure host-country buy-in and ownership of the YE 
Activity, USAID will use a co-creation approach. Once applications are reviewed and an 
apparently successful applicant (ASA) is identified, USAID/Djibouti will convene a co-
creation workshop with its partners including, the ASA, the Government of Djibouti (GoDj) 
counterparts, the CISCO Network Academy, the Ministry of Education and Vocational 
Training, the Ministry of Labor, the Djibouti’s Chamber of Commerce, and other key 
stakeholders to jointly design the full activity implementation plan. Further details will be 
discussed with the ASA. (Note: The CISCO Network Academy is expected to provide 
approximately $3 million of capacity building activity as an in-kind contribution for 
interventions in the ICT space.) 

“Pre-application conference - To enable a greater understanding of the requirements USAID 
will host a virtual pre-application conference on August 19, 2022 17:00 Addis Ababa Time. 
The conference will be hosted on the Google Meet platform. It is the responsibility of the 
applicants to download and become familiar with the use of this platform prior to the 
conference date. The login information will be provided on Amendment 01 with Q&As. 

 

Please send any questions to the points of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received by the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this NOFO does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government 
nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or submission 
of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the 
applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in collaborating with USAID/Djibouti. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

/Signed: Original signature on file/ 

 

Alula Abera 

Agreement Officer


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Contents 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 3 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 5 
A.1 Title 5 
A.2 Activity objectives 5 
A.3 Background 5 
A.4 General Activity Guidance 11 
A.5 Activity Description 13 
A.6 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING 23 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 26 
B.1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 26 
B.2 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 26 
B.3 Type of Award and Substantial Involvement 26 
B.4 Authorized Geographic Code 27 
B.5 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 27 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 29 
C.1 Eligible Applicants 29 
C.2 Cost Sharing or Matching 29 
C.3 Number of Applications that May be Submitted 29 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 30 
D.1. Agency Point of Contacts 30 
D.2 Questions and Answers 30 
D.3 General Content and Form of Application 30 
D.4 Application Submission Procedures 33 
D.5 Technical Application Format 34 
D.6 Business (Cost) Application Format 42 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 57 
E.1 Criteria 57 
E.2 Review and Selection Process 57 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 61 
F.1. Federal Award Notices 61 
F.2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 61 
F.3. Reporting Requirements 61 
F.4. Program Income 66 
F.5. Environmental Compliance 66 
G.1. Points of contact (POC): 68 
G.2. The Agreement Officer Representative (AOR): 68 
G.3. Different contacts for distinct kinds of help, 68 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 69 
ANNEX 1 – BUDGET FORMATS 71 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 77 
ANNEX 3. REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 79 
ANNEX 3: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (PPI) 81 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

A.1 Title 

 

USAID/Djibouti Youth Employment Activity 

 

A.2 Activity objectives 

 

The goal of this activity is to increase youth employment through strengthened workforce 
programs and expanded links to quality jobs. The activity’s objective is to increase employment 
with greater access, equity, and effectiveness. The activity will support United States Government 
(USG) priorities and Government of Djibouti (GoDj)-led efforts to increase readiness for, and 
access to, quality employment opportunities for Djiboutian youth. The activity will pursue 
transformative and sustainable change by collaborating closely with local stakeholders to facilitate 
the development of promising sectors and sub-sectors, increasing job opportunities/availability for 
well-prepared Djiboutian youth. Activity interventions will focus on governance and 
collaboration, the labor demand, and the labor supply, aligned with the following Intermediate 
Results (IRs): 

 

1. IR1: Governance for increased youth employment strengthened: The activity will 
support effective coordination between key stakeholders, including government and the 
private sector, and will work to gain a clear understanding of promising sectors and 
subsectors for youth employment. 
2. IR2: Availability of quality jobs expanded: The activity will explore opportunities to 
support the growth of private sector businesses in sectors and subsectors with significant 
youth job creation potential, focusing on identifying and alleviating both regulatory and 
non-regulatory constraints. 
3. IR3: Youth workforce readiness strengthened: The activity will work with 
technical/vocational education institutions to strengthen workforce readiness programs, 
train youth and ensure that participants have the skills and abilities required by potential 
employers in promising sectors and subsectors. 
3.1 General Information 





 

The activity’s objective is also supported by three cross-cutting and complementary 
considerations: learning and adaptive management; gender equity and social inclusion, and; digital 
and information technology. 

 

A.3 Background 

 

 

Djibouti is a lower-middle-income economy with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) equivalent 


to US$1.85 billion in 2017. The country’s population is estimated at one million people, 
approximately 75 percent of whom live in and around Djibouti Ville. Regions outside the capital 
are sparsely populated, and a substantial portion of the rural population are nomadic or semi-
nomadic pastoralists. Despite a relatively high per capita income of US$1,862 in 2015, 30 percent 
of the population lives in poverty and 21 percent lives in extreme poverty, according to the fourth 
(2018) round of household surveys (EDAM4). The same survey also found that 36 percent of 
Djibouti’s population is under 14 years old and 51 percent is under 24.1 The country weathered 
the economic strain of the COVID pandemic well, retaining positive GDP growth of 0.5 percent 
in 2020, as the recovery of key sectors (construction, trade, energy) and strong trade with 
Ethiopia boosted exports and buoyed the transportation and logistics sector.2 

1 World Bank. Project Appraisal Document: Expanding Opportunities for Learning Project Djibouti. 

2. Djibouti's Economic Update — April 2021 (worldbank.org) 

3 In May of 2018 the Ethiopian government expanded its engagement with the port facilities in Sudan and Somalia. 
Additionally, the July 2018 peace agreement between Ethiopia and Eritrea included access to Eritrean ports for 
Ethiopian trade. It is not clear how the current conflict in Ethiopia might affect Ethiopian trade through the port 
facilities in any of these countries, or through Djibouti. 

4 African Development Bank. “Djibouti: Country strategy paper 2011-2015,” August 2011. 

5 DISED. “Annuaire Statistique, Edition 2017,” 2017. 

 

Djibouti enjoys a strategic position on the Red Sea, enabling it to host a variety of major military 
bases and a modern port complex. The country serves as a transit port for the region, providing 
international transport, shipment, and refueling capabilities. Until recently,3 Djibouti provided 
the only options by which Ethiopia was able to access seaborne trade, including seven ports, a 
780 kilometer railroad connecting Djibouti Ville to Addis Ababa, and three Special Economic 
Zones (SEZs). Traffic through Djibouti’s port has consistently increased, and the country is 
developing substantial storage and handling capabilities to meet the demand. The economy 
involves a large informal sector (by some estimates 60 percent of economic activity4) and a 
modest private sector. According to estimates by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the 
private sector includes roughly 8,000 businesses, only 3,500 of which are registered,5 and the 
majority of which are self-employed individuals with little to no training or prior business 
experience. The GoDj plays a central role in nearly all sectors, acting as the major or sole 
shareholder in the companies that manage the ports, telecommunications, energy, airports, roads, 
and railways. The country’s agricultural and manufacturing production is extremely limited, 
comprising only 3.1 percent and 1.4 percent of Djibouti’s GDP respectively. In terms of 
employment, an estimated 40 percent of the Djiboutian workforce is employed by the public 
sector, with another 40 percent employed in the informal private sector, and only 20 percent 
employed in the formal private sector. 

 

Building on its comparative economic strengths, over the past decade the GoDj has engaged in 
widespread reforms targeting macroeconomic stability, institutional efficiency, integration into 
the global economy, employment of youth and women, and social cohesion and poverty 
reduction. The result has been sustained GDP growth of between four and nine percent every 
year except one from 2009 to 2019. As mentioned above, this growth has been driven mainly by 
investments in infrastructure, and the increasing transit of goods to and from Ethiopia. 

 

 


3.2 Problem Statement 


 

 

Unemployment 

 

Despite these gains, Djibouti faces high and persistent unemployment. According to the World 
Bank, in 2015 Djibouti employed only a quarter of its working population (ages 15 and over), 
largely due to low labor force participation among women. Most young people (aged 15 to 24) 
are in school, with only 25 percent participating in the labor force. However, of those who do 
participate, fully 68 percent are unemployed.6 The reasons driving this unemployment rate 
include the highly-centralized economy with the government playing an outsized role, the 
comparatively small number of formal private sector enterprises, the challenges in facilitating 
investment, and the unskilled labor force. Additionally, even qualified job seekers display a 
disinclination to actively search for jobs or to accept entry-level or low-responsibility positions.7 

6 World Bank. Economic Transformation in Djibouti, Systemic Country Diagnostic, October 2018. 

7 A 2015 labor force survey found that the unemployed reported the minimum acceptable wage to be DJF 126,000, 
above the average of DJF 90,000 found in the public sector and formal private sector. World Bank. Economic 
Transformation in Djibouti, Systemic Country Diagnostic, October 2018. 

 

 

Djiboutian workers also compete with a sizable foreign labor population, hired either because 
they are less expensive or offer greater expertise than local Djiboutian labor. Chinese enterprises 
implementing major infrastructure projects often bring their own labor force from China. Other 
infrastructure projects require English language proficiency, which is not readily available 
among Djiboutians. In the transport sector, Ethiopian transit policy requires Ethiopian importers 
to use Ethiopian carriers instead of Djiboutian carriers. 

 

Finally, different segments of the youth population face different employment challenges, with 
significant distinctions related to geography (urban/rural) and gender. 

 

Workforce readiness programs 

 

Currently young people receive workforce preparation through a variety of institutions, including 
General Education Sites (high schools), the technical and vocational education and training 
(TVET) system managed by the Ministere de l'Education Nationale et la Formation 
Professionnelle (MENFOP), and universities. TVET programs provide training in technical skill 
areas, complemented by courses in language (mainy French and Arabic) and mathematics, as 
well as workshops and internships. There are 12 TVET centers under MENFOP, including six 
multi-sectoral technical schools, three sectoral schools (hospitality, construction, 
transport/logistics), and three vocational training centers providing short-term training. There are 
additional non-formal vocational training service delivery programs aimed at individuals with 
lower educational qualifications, such as out-of-school youth. These programs are managed by 
non-governmental organizations, as well as other Ministries such as the Ministry of Women’s 
Affairs (MFF). The University of Djibouti provides university-level education programs. The 
bulk of the youth engaged in secondary education are in General Education Sites (18,826 in the 
2018-2019 school year) with a significantly smaller proportion enrolled in TVETs (3,664). The 


University hosted 10,608 students that year, while 1,013 were enrolled in other professional 
training programs.8 There is also a small number of civil society organizations (CSOs) that work 
with youth, including potential job seekers. Additionally, the Agence Nationale de l’Emploi, de 
la Formation et de l’Insertion Professionnelle (ANEFIP) is responsible for the training and 
placement of job seekers. 

8 MENFOP, Cambridge Education, Partenariat Mondial pour L’Education, UNICEF. Analyse du Système Éducatif 
de Djibouti. 2020. 

9 World Bank. Economic Transformation in Djibouti, Systemic Country Diagnostic, October 2018. 

 

 

While some workforce readiness programs do appear to be aligned with the needs of the market, 
such as those focused on logistics and the ports, the extent to which they effectively equip youth 
with the skills and competencies required by potential employers is unclear. The private sector 
expresses some skepticism in the quality of ANEFIP’s services, articulating a belief that not even 
the public sector recruits from ANEFIP are effectively prepared. In the TVETs, there is often a 
lack of alignment between the content of training curricula and market needs, and an absence of 
collaboration and communication between the TVET providers and private sector employers. 
Systems for channeling students into specific career or vocational pathways are often not 
responsive to individual interests and aptitudes. There is a limited focus on developing work 
readiness skills and general soft skills (though the USAID/Djibouti Workforce Development 
Activity made some progress in addressing this gap). Certificate programs often last for one year, 
a timeframe that makes it difficult to respond efficiently to emerging opportunities and to supply 
workers to employers looking to hire quickly. Additionally, workforce readiness programs 
display persistent gender disparities, with men directed towards industrial training that leads to 
higher paying jobs and women directed towards administrative training or traditional female-
dominated trades such as sewing or baking. These patterns track with traditional gender 
stereotyping and limiting cultural beliefs and preferences. 

 

University diplomas are recognized and valued by employers in Djibouti. However graduates 
from the University of Djibouti often struggle to compete with graduates from foreign 
universities for available management and high-skill positions and career paths. 

 

Promising sectors 

 

While the government currently employs a substantial percentage of the Djiboutian labor force, 
it offers little scope for new hiring. Camp Lemmonier, the American military base in Djibouti, 
and the American Embassy are the second largest employers in Djibouti, hiring over 1000 
Djiboutians. The public sector, which pays higher than market wages,9 is saturated and 
employment gains are likely to come from the private sector, a dynamic that is central to the 
GoDj’s strategic economic planning. Efforts to address the youth unemployment issue fall under 
the “Vision Djibouti 2035,” the government’s comprehensive economic strategy, launched in 
August of 2014. The strategy’s goal is to maintain a high rate of annual economic growth (7.5 
percent), create 200,000 jobs (and thereby bring the unemployment rate down to ten percent), 
and triple per capita income by 2035. 

 

The strategy commits the government to investing in key private sector value chains and to offer 


incentives to informal enterprises to join the formal economy. The plan prioritizes the expansion 
of labor-intensive sectors such as manufacturing and transportation, and emphasizes the role of 
export development in Djibouti’s growth, including fishing and tourism. There is indeed 
significant room for growth in the fishing industry in Djibouti, drawing on the country’s control 
of 38,616 square miles of productive waters. At the moment, the country has no large-scale 
fishing industry, and is producing only 2,500 metric tons per year out of a potential 35,000 metric 
tons, and employing only around 3,000 people.10 Tourism is one of the fastest growing sectors 
in the country, with about 70,000 tourists arriving per year. Many of these arrivals are friends 
and family of soldiers stationed on military bases, but the country’s national parks, mountain 
ranges, beaches, and thriving capital hold the promise of attracting others.11 Additionally, the 
World Bank and others have noted the growth potential of the renewable energy sector, as 
Djibouti has access to geothermal, wind, and solar resources.12 The country anticipates 
opportunities in drilling for geothermal energy resources, and Djibouti is currently constructing 
a major wind farm that is scheduled to begin operations in 2022 and will require technicians and 
maintenance workers among others. Additionally, sub-sectors such as energy transmission, 
distribution, and storage (TDS) require skill sets that are transferable to the construction sector. 
Solar in particular presents opportunities for rural employment, since sales and installation of 
off-grid solutions is likely to happen outside of the capital. To support the development of these 
and other industries, Vision Djibouti 2035 focuses on investment, divided into two phases: a first 
phase lasting ten years focused on deepening reforms, strengthening infrastructure, and 
developing human capital; and a second phase focused on the expansion of domestic and foreign 
private investment. 

10 What Are The Biggest Industries In Djibouti? - WorldAtlas 

11 What Are The Biggest Industries In Djibouti? - WorldAtlas 

12 Djibouti Overview: Development news, research, data | World Bank 

13 Analyse du Système Educatif de Djibouti: Evaluer les progrès réalisés et les difficultés rencontrées pour définir 
de nouvelles avancées, 19 Avril 2020. p171. 

 

A national labor market assessment commissioned under the USAID WFD Program identified 
three sectors experiencing rapid global and local growth, and which therefore hold potential for 
increased employment, including youth employment. The transport and logistics sector is 
projected to have entry-level openings for port dockers, container handlers and cleaners, and 
automobile mechanics. The construction sector is expected to offer work to trained masons, 
carpenters, plumbers, and electricians. And the tourism sector is projected to need hotel 
supervisors/managers, receptionists, guides, and housekeepers. While these may indeed be the 
most promising sectors, the job creation potential is still modest. The assessment projected that 
the tourism sector would create 270 new jobs in the course of a year, the construction sector 
would create 279 new jobs, and the transport and logistics sector would create 516 new jobs. 
Available data shows that only a small percentage of Djibouti’s active working population is 
currently in paid employment, and a large majority is without work.13 This analysis suggests that, 
without significant additional job creation, the country is unlikely to make measurable progress 
towards bringing down the overall unemployment rate. 

 

Constraints and opportunities 

 

Unfortunately, the growth of the private sector in Djibouti faces a variety of obstacles. One 


prominent factor constraining private sector development is an unskilled workforce, and labor 
supply interventions to strengthen workforce readiness programs are certainly required. But the 
private sector is constrained by a number of other factors, including high electricity costs, high 
unemployment, the large informal sector, regional instability, opaque business practices, 
compliance risks, corruption, and a weak financial sector.14 Some of these constraints are outside 
the manageable interests of USAID or the Government of Djibouti to affect, such as the 
disruption in cargo transit resulting from instability in Ethiopia. Additionally, addressing a 
constraint like the high cost of electricity, which affects nearly every sector and sub-sector in the 
country, will likely require a combination of the political will to enact substantive policy reform 
and sizable new investment in infrastructure, and are thus best considered medium- to long-term 
objectives. USAID has had several interventions over the recent years to assist the government 
to improve/reform the regulatory framework and to open up the electricity industry, but the 
political will to do so has not always been present. The construction of the wind farm and 
activities in the geothermal sector mark a new turning point. 

14 US Department of State, 2021 Investment Climate Statements: Djibouti 

15 Doing Business in Djibouti - World Bank Group 

16 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/djibouti/publication/economic-update-april-2021 

 

3.3 Relationship to GoDj Strategic Plans and Mission’s Strategic Framework 


 

That said, the Government of Djibouti has declared its interest in private sector-led economic 
growth, and demonstrated its willingness to enact productive reforms. In 2020 Djibouti ranked 
112 (out of 190 countries) in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” ranking, improving 59 places 
since 2017.15 The government also recently announced pro-business tax reforms, such as plans 
to halve the minimum flat-rate tax, and to provide tax exemptions for the ICT, transport, and 
tourism sectors.16 As mentioned, the government has set a target date of 2035 for broad and 
ambitious economy-wide transformation. But as investments in infrastructure begin to bear fruit 
and specific reforms affect firm-level decision-making, specific sectors and subsectors, either 
nationally or within specific geographies, will begin to grow before others. Some sectors and 
subsectors may currently be growing. Some may be on the verge of growing, requiring improved 
firm-level management, access to finance on favorable terms, improved linkages to target 
markets, or a workforce with the proper knowledge base. Some may be stagnant in the absence 
of larger structural change, such as lower costs of electricity or the completion of a key 
infrastructure project. 

 

This activity will focus on identifying and understanding promising sectors and subsectors for 
youth employment. It will support youth workforce preparation and linkages for the sectors and 
subsectors that are currently, or will soon be, growing and hiring, and will focus on addressing 
key constraints for others to enable them to move towards growth. It will collaborate closely with 
the private sector, policymakers, and technical/vocational education institutions. It will draw on 
Positive Youth Development (PYD) methodology to integrate the preferences of youth, and it 
will emphasize an iterative approach that surfaces and applies useful learning. 

 

 

The activity supports Djibouti’s Vision 2035 strategic plan, particularly “Pillar III: Diversified 
and Competitive Economy, with the Private Sector as a Driver.” The activity is closely aligned 


with the following strategic orientations: diversified economic growth while giving an important 
role to the private sector; promoting the country’s attractiveness and strategic partnerships, and; a 
comprehensive employment policy. 

 

The activity also supports Djibouti’s National Employment Policy, particularly the following 
Strategic Objectives: 

● Strategic Objective 1: Increase and improve the supply of TVET in line with the needs of 
the labor market; 
● Strategic Objective 2: Improve the employability and integration of young people and 
women seeking employment; 
● Strategic Objective 3: Develop a segment of SMEs/SMIs dense and intensive in decent 
employment; 
● Strategic Objective 5: Promote a harmonious functioning of the labor market; 
● Strategic Objective 7: Build the capacities of labor market stakeholders. 
3.4 Relationship to USAID Policies and Strategies 
3.5 Sustainability 
4.1 Coordination with Other USAID Activities 





 

Finally, the activity is aligned with the Ministry of Labor’s Logical Framework of the Strategic 
Action Plan, particularly the objectives focused on “improving the employability and integration 
of young people and women seeking employment,” “institutional support and capacity building,” 
“promotion of decent work,” and “promotion of the female workforce.” 

 

 

The activity will support the USAID Private Sector Engagement Policy by increasing and 
deepening collaboration with the private sector, making catalytic use of USAID resources, seeking 
market-based solutions to improve sustainability, and mobilizing private capital. The Activity 
aligns with the U.S. Mission’s Integrated Country Strategy (ICS), Mission Objective 2.2: Close 
labor market skills gap, assisting in the reduction of youth unemployment. The activity will 
support the USAID Strategic Framework for Djibouti 2021-2025 by providing USAID/Djibouti 
with an opportunity and resources to build on the existing Workforce Development Activity, with 
an enhanced focus on increasing employment and alignment with the private sector. 

 

 

An important objective of the activity is sustainability as extensively discussed throughout. In 
order to be more so, partnership for sustainability will extend to community/local groups. In late 
2021, USAID set ambitious objectives for establishing direct partnerships with local organizations 
that have the potential to advance both their national and USAID goals. Offerors’ applications will 
be strengthened by demonstrating realistic and concrete approaches for how they will partner with 
local Djiboutian organizations and/or individuals under the YE activity to ensure their voices are 
heard; engage them in leadership roles in the activity; and build their capacity to potentially serve 
as direct USAID recipients in the coming years to achieve USAID objectives. 

 

A.4 General Activity Guidance 

 

 


The activity will build on USAID’s long-standing commitment to supporting youth workforce 
development in Djibouti. The activity will complement USAID’s recently completed Workforce 
Development Program (WFD - 2016-2022). The WFD Program worked with technical/vocational 
education institutions to improve youth workforce readiness and competitiveness, thus closing the 
labor market skills gap and assisting in the reduction of youth unemployment. It also maintained 
strong relationships with three key host country partners: MENFOP, ANEFIP, and the Chamber 
of Commerce of Djibouti (CCD). The new youth employment activity will build on the WFD 
Program’s gains in strengthening technical/vocational education institutions, as well as its work 
to coordinate key players. Another potential opportunity for collaboration is with 
USAID/Djibouti’s new civil society strengthening activity which began in 2022, particularly work 
with CSOs that support employment or livelihoods, or that focus on youth. Finally, there will be 
coordination opportunities with the expected early childhood education (ECE) project focused on 
job creation to meet the demand for ECE services, and training to fill those jobs. 

 

Coordination with other Donor Initiatives 

 

The activity will coordinate closely with other donor initiatives focused on similar or 
complementary outcomes, including the World Bank and the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP). In October of 2021 the World Bank announced a new Country Partnership 
Framework for Djibouti aimed at reducing poverty through private sector development.17 The new 
Framework’s two main focus areas are: 1) to promote inclusive private sector-led growth, job 
creation, and human capital, with a focus on sectors such as tourism, housing, agribusiness, and 
energy; and 2) to strengthen the role and capacity of the state through encouraging increased 
transparency, and supporting the delivery of basic services in health, education, and water. 

17 New World Bank Group Program to Boost Djibouti’s Efforts to Reduce Poverty 

4.2 Target Beneficiaries and Geographic Focus 


 

While UNDP focuses largely on livelihoods and access to improved services, the organization has 
extensive experience working with the GoDj in developing employment legislation and policy, 
including assisting the Ministry of Labor to develop the national employment policy. UNDP also 
manages an investor map with 21 new investment opportunities in Djibouti. The organization also 
has existing relationships with the private sector, including successful experience developing 
internship programs. 

 

The recipient will be expected to establish and maintain productive relationships with these and 
other donor initiatives it will identify, avoid unproductive redundancy and identify areas of 
complementary interventions. 

 

 

The target beneficiaries for the activity are Djiboutian youth ages 18 to 35 who are seeking 
employment. The activity will consider promising sectors and subsectors in both urban and rural 
areas, across all six regions, with increasing equity and inclusion as important guiding principles. 

 

 

 


5.1 Problem Statement 





A.5 Activity Description 

 

 

Djibouti faces high and persistent unemployment, particularly among youth. According to the 
World Bank, 68 percent of young people who are not in school, and therefore are considered to 
be participating in the labor force, are unemployed.18 The effectiveness of existing workforce 
readiness programs is unclear, as is the private sector’s capacity to absorb youth job seekers. 

18 World Bank. Economic Transformation in Djibouti, Systemic Country Diagnostic, October 2018 

5.2 Implementation Overview 


 

 

The activity will focus on understanding the labor absorption potential of specific sectors and 
subsectors before investing in workforce readiness training for youth. The activity will move 
forward with supply-side interventions only after securing a high degree of confidence that jobs 
exist, or will exist, for graduating participants. For promising sectors and subsectors that face 
persistent demand-side constraints (poor management, lack of access to finance, regulatory 
obstacles, etc.) that limit growth and job creation, the activity will take a market systems 
development approach to alleviating those constraints before devoting resources to training youth 
for jobs with those employers. Achievements in alleviating these constraints and moving 
promising sectors and subsectors towards increased job creation will be important measures of 
success. 

 

The activity will develop a clear and replicable methodology for identifying promising sectors and 
subsectors for employing Djiboutian youth, understanding the level of labor absorption potential 
and the constraints to additional job creation, identifying which of those constraints are within the 
activity’s manageable interests to alleviate, implementing the necessary interventions, and 
preparing youth to access existing or expected jobs. The activity will take an inclusive approach 
to each promising sector or subsector, engaging activity personnel from all three IRs described 
below, as well as representatives from the GoDj, the private sector, representatives from non-
government technical/vocational education institutions, and youth themselves. Understanding and 
balancing the interests and priorities of each stakeholder will be critical to increasing the prospect 
of youth employment in a promising sector or subsector. 

 

Demand-side considerations, such as labor absorption potential, will not be the only criteria for 
selecting the sectors and subsectors on which to focus. The activity will also draw on Positive 
Youth Development methodologies to understand the extent to which sectors or sub sectors are 
interesting to youth, or could be made interesting through strategies such as increasing the focus 
on innovation and technology. Additionally, the activity will consider factors specific to gender 
and geographic location. The promise of jobs is a necessary but not sufficient factor in selecting a 
sector or subsector in which to invest activity time and effort; if youth are unwilling or unable to 
pursue jobs in a particular sector or subsector, facilitating the growth of those firms may increase 
employment, though not necessarily youth employment. Additionally, the activity will not wait 
until all demand-side constraints have been alleviated before beginning supply-side work to 
prepare Djiboutian youth for jobs. The activity will collaborate closely with private sector partners 
to determine when the firms in a promising sector or subsector are ready to engage in proven job 


5.3 Theory of Change 
5.4 Activity Inception Period 





placement strategies, such as internships and apprenticeships, and will schedule the training of 
youth accordingly. 

 

The most important measure of success will be the number of Djiboutian youth who secure quality 
employment resulting from their participation in the activity’s interventions. That said, progress 
in alleviating constraints in promising sectors and subsectors will also be important achievements, 
recognizing that these are necessary steps towards the overall goal of addressing the youth 
employment challenge. Some selected sectors and subsectors may not absorb a significant amount 
of youth labor by the end of the activity. Efforts to develop these sectors and subsectors will still 
be considered successful if key constraints are alleviated, and clear milestones achieved. 
Additionally, the activity will be realistic when work on a specific sector or subsector is not 
progressing as anticipated, or upon determining that the constraints are beyond the activity’s 
manageable interests to alleviate. In such cases, the activity will work with its partners to close 
out work on that sector or subsector, and shift resources to a more promising opportunity. 
Learning/adaptability is critical to the success of this project. 

 

 

IF governance and coordination of efforts to increase youth employment are strengthened, 
including a greater understanding of sectors and subsectors with significant youth employment 
potential; AND constraints affecting those sectors and subsectors are alleviated, enabling 
employers to grow and multiply, and hiring to increase; AND workforce readiness programs’ 
ability to prepare youth to secure and retain jobs in those sectors and subsectors is increased; 
THEN more Djiboutian youth will obtain quality and sustainable employment. 

 

 

The activity will begin with a three-month inception period during which time the implementing 
partner will work with local stakeholders to conduct contextual and other types of assessments to 
inform refinement of the overall approach and in particular the Year 1 work plan. One important 
area of focus during this period will be working with key local partners (Ministry of Labor, 
ANEFIP, MENFOP, CCD, the private sector, other development partners, and others) to identify 
or begin to create the coordination and collaboration mechanisms described under Sub-IR 1.1. The 
Ministry of Labor generally, and ANEFIP specifically, along with MENFOP and CCD, represent 
key sustainability partners. The recipient is expected to collaborate closely with these entities 
towards the goal of co-creating interventions that they can move forward after the activity 
concludes. Additionally, the implementing partner will plan an initial high-level assessment of the 
labor market. This overview will draw on the existing research conducted by USAID, including 
the findings from the final evaluation of the WFD Program, the GoDj, the World Bank and 
others,19 supplementing existing information with direct data gathering activities as necessary. 
While this assessment will provide the activity with an updated understanding of the Djiboutian 
labor market, the main goal will be to identify promising sectors and subsectors for youth 
employment, furnishing the activity with a list of candidates for more focused, deep-dive 
assessments. Another important focus during this period will be to refine the activity’s approach 

19 The CCD is currently conducting studies into promising sectors, such as ICT and hospitality management. 

 


5.5 Intermediate Results and Key Interventions/Sub-Results 


to accessing youth job seekers, including coordinating with ANEFIP, MENFOP, the private sector 
and potential CSO partners. 

 

 

1. IR1: Governance for increased youth employment strengthened 


 

This IR addresses the governance of efforts to increase youth employment broadly defined, with 
a central role for the GoDj but including important roles for the private sector and civil society 
organizations supporting youth workforce development. This IR focuses on the critical work of 
building and maintaining collaboration among the key stakeholders, developing a replicable 
methodology for identifying and understanding sectors and subsectors with substantial youth 
employment potential, and coordinating implementation of the interventions to alleviate 
constraints and connect youth to jobs. USAID envisions the Ministry of Labor as the leading local 
stakeholder for this IR. The recipient will support the MoL to assume ownership of the 
interventions described in this section with the aim of ensuring sustainability beyond the life of 
the activity. 

 

Sub-IR 1.1: Coordination between policy-makers, the private sector, and technical/vocational 
education institutions improved. 

Under this Sub-IR the recipient is expected to develop an approach to bring the key youth 
employment stakeholders together in productive consultation. Priority stakeholders are likely to 
included the GoDj (including the Ministry of Labor, ANEFIP, and MENFOP), the private sector 
(including the CCD20), and others.21 As mentioned above, the relevant GoDj entities and the CCD 
are envisioned to be the key local partners, and the recipient is expected to pursue deliberate and 
substantive collaboration towards sustainable change. Ideally the key knowledge-generation 
activities - such as an initial broad labor market assessment to determine promising sectors and 
subsectors, and subsequent deep-dive assessments - would be co-designed and co-implemented 
with this group, though the recipient should avoid the risk of significant delay while waiting on 
consensus. Once promising sectors and subsectors are identified the activity may need to facilitate 
the formation of smaller groups, comprising geography-specific or sector-specific employers, 
policy-makers, and technical/vocational education institutions. 

20 With over 5,000 Djiboutian companies in its database, the Chamber of Commerce is uniquely positioned to 
convene the key private sector players in any promising sectors or subsectors. 

21 Other potentially relevant stakeholders could include business development services providers, human resources 
services providers (like temporary employment agencies), trade associations, and relevant civil society 
organizations connected to the USAID Civil Society Organizations Strengthening Program. 

 

The recipient is expected to gain a clear understanding of the interests of key stakeholders, and 
make efforts to construct an approach that demonstrates how participation is beneficial to those 
interests. Making the business case for participation to private sector partners will be particularly 
important and challenging, given past experiences of less active involvement in such efforts. (The 
focus on alleviating constraints described under IR2 may serve as an incentive for private sector 
participation.) If vibrant and productive, this forum will facilitate information sharing between 
stakeholders, allowing technical/vocational education institutions and other supply-side actors to 
gain a clear understanding of the skills and competencies required by employers. While this 


collaboration is expected to be driven by the activity initially, the recipient is expected to explore 
strategies for transferring leadership to the Ministry of Labor over time, including accounting for 
the required human and financial resources. 

 

This forum is expected to facilitate discussions producing decisions and actions that will be taken 
up under separate IRs. One important example is establishing opportunities for mutually beneficial 
internship arrangements, building off of several successful recent examples. The USAID/Djibouti 
successfully brokered a public-private partnership involving the Sheraton Hotel and Cornell 
University to prepare promising Djiboutian youth for management roles in the hotel industry. 
After a thorough selection process four young job-seekers entered and completed a nine-month 
practicum that included online learning and completion of eCornell’s hospitality certificate 
programs, on-the-job learning through job-shadowing and application of skills at the Sheraton 
Hotel of Djibouti, and English language improvement through classes offered by an English 
professor sourced by USAID/Djibouti. While employment at the Sheraton is anticipated, each 
candidate will emerge from this experience with critical skills and qualifications to compete for 
hotel management jobs across Djibouti. USAID views this as a promising example, and anticipates 
the new activity will build on this experience. The private sector has indicated that it is interested 
in expanding programs such as this, and that it sees the business case for hosting and training 
interns and apprentices. The recently concluded USAID workforce activity placed hundreds of 
interns with private sector companies that resulted in an impressive number of permanent jobs 
after the internship period. Additionally, the Ministry of Labor has developed the legal framework 
for an apprenticeship contract. This forum is expected to facilitate the development/continuation 
of similar internship opportunities. 

 

Additionally, under this IR the activity will support the handover and sustainability of the online 
Job Matching Platform, developed under the previous program.22 The WFD Program developed 
and launched the pilot version of this platform and began the process of handing over operations 
to ANEFIP. The new activity will continue this handover process, ensuring that the resources 
invested in this intervention are not wasted, and that the platform lives up to its expectations. The 
activity will then support ANEFIP to maintain and improve the platform, encouraging employers 
in promising sectors and sub-sectors to post openings, and youth job seekers to utilize the tool. 

22 https://djiboutiemployment.org/en/ 

 

This forum also provides the opportunity to advocate for the development of hiring options that 
accommodate the specific circumstances of women and persons with disabilities, such as part-
time and contract options. 

 

Sub-IR 1.2: Ministry of Labor and other stakeholders’ understanding of promising sectors and 
subsectors for youth employment improved. 

Under this Sub-IR the recipient is expected to draw on the most effective techniques from market 
systems development, including market facilitation and value chain facilitation, to identify and 
understand sectors and subsectors with promising youth employment potential. This work will 
expand on efforts from the WFD Program to develop the labor market assessment capabilities of 
the Observatoire National de l’Emploi et des Qualifications (ONEQ), the National Office of Labor 
Statistics within ANEFIP. The program supported ONEQ to conduct studies of the transport and 
logistics sector, the tourism sector, and the construction sector. ONEQ (and ANEFIP more 


broadly) will be a key local partner for interventions under this Sub-IR. This effort will connect 
to the focus on strengthening the job matching platform described above. 

 

Key points of focus will be the existing youth employment potential, the key constraints 
preventing growth and increased hiring, the tractability of alleviating those constraints, the 
timeline by which those constraints might be alleviated, and the key skills and competencies 
employers require. Most of this information is expected to come from assessments conducted by 
the recipient, aimed at particular sectors, subsectors, geographies, or niche markets, rather than a 
large blanket national labor market assessment.23 That said, the recipient is encouraged to build 
on existing market assessment findings from the WFD Program and the GoDj’s priority sectors, 
including fishing, tourism, construction, transport and logistics, and renewable energy. The 
recipient is also expected to draw on PYD methodology to identify sectors and subsectors that 
currently, or are expected to, fit with the interests and preferences of Djiboutian youth. 

23 USAID has produced a variety of resources and methodologies that might prove useful for these assessments, 
such as the Labor Market Assessment Guide developed under YouthPower, and Getting Employment to Work for 
Self-Reliance: A USAID Framework for Programming 

24 A prominent example here is Chinese construction firms using Chinese labor. It is not likely that the activity will 
be able to influence these preferences, and so a sector or subsector dominated by these firms is unlikely to hold 
substantial promise for employment of Djiboutian youth. 

 

Important considerations in the understanding of promising sectors and subsectors for youth 
employment include, but are not limited to, the following: 

● Is the sector or subsector aligned with the government of Djibouti’s economic growth 
priorities? Are other donors supporting the growth of the sector or subsector? 
● Have employers in this sector or subsector traditionally preferred foreign labor to hiring 
Djiboutians? If so, what are the factors driving that preference, from both the employers 
and the job seekers, and to what extent is the activity able to address those factors?24 
● To what extent is the sector or subsector dominated by informal enterprises? To what 
extent is it within the activity’s manageable interests to facilitate formalization, often an 
important step in a firm’s ability to offer quality employment? 
● To what extent is the sector or subsector constrained by issues that are largely outside of 
the activity’s ability to address, such as the high cost of electricity or the delocalization of 
port-based enterprises to Sudan or Somalia? 


 

This information will form the basis for approaches to alleviate key constraints and expand 
employment, and the establishment of milestones. Ideally these approaches would be dynamic 
rather than fixed, updated regularly through input from the stakeholders assembled under Sub-IR 
1.1 and from ongoing collaborating, learning, and adapting (CLA) activities. These knowledge 
generation approaches would be co-designed and co-implemented with those key stakeholders, 
with local counterparts able to replicate the methodology independently by the end of the activity. 
Additionally, these approaches themselves represent opportunities for learning and improvement 
with each subsequent iteration focused on new sectors and subsectors. 

 

Considering the concentration of population and economic activity in the capital, identifying 
promising sectors and subsectors that might boost youth employment in rural areas is of particular 
interest and is a challenge. Many of the drivers of low workforce participation in rural areas - such 


as low literacy rates, lack of food security, access to adequate child care, access to water and 
sanitation services, and lack of access to healthcare - are outside of the activity’s manageable 
interests. However, the activity can seek sectors and subsectors that involve supply linkages to the 
capital, or that have growth potential in rural areas, such as tourism, energy, and construction. 
While the activity is not expected to have an extensive focus on entrepreneurship or micro-
enterprise development, interventions in rural areas might be an area in which entrepreneurship is 
appropriate. In general, interventions in rural areas are expected to be heavily learning-focused, 
potentially producing new knowledge and understanding, if not more tangible results. 

 

While this activity is primarily focused on employment rather than entrepreneurship, USAID 
recognizes that market research processes might identify particularly promising entrepreneurship 
opportunities. As an example, USAID/Djibouti is currently supporting a nascent pottery 
cooperative that is producing high-quality pottery products from Djiboutian clay. It is possible 
there are other opportunities, in sectors such as off-grid energy solutions, fishery, agriculture or 
others. The recipient is encouraged to remain open to these possibilities, should they emerge. That 
said, USAID does not expect the recipient to identify a large number of similar opportunities, and 
would not support providing start-up grants and technical assistance without substantial evidence 
of growth potential. Any potentially promising entrepreneurship sectors or sub sectors should meet 
the same standards for youth employment potential as other sectors and subsectors before activity 
resources are invested. 

 

2. IR2: Availability of quality jobs expanded 


 

Work under this IR will focus on constraints on private sector labor demand. This IR is focused 
on expanding the number of quality jobs available in the private sector labor market, a necessary 
step towards reducing the overall unemployment rate, as well as the youth unemployment rate. 
However, the recipient will focus specifically on sectors and subsectors that hold promise for 
substantial youth employment, incorporating the strengths and preferences of Djiboutian youth as 
well as market growth potential (as described under Sub-IR 1.2). USAID envisions the Chamber 
of Commerce of Djibouti as the leading local stakeholder for this IR. The recipient will support 
the CCD to assume ownership of the interventions described in this section with the aim of 
sustainability beyond the life of the activity. 

 

Sub-IR 2.1: Regulatory and policy environment for investment in, and expansion of, promising 
sectors and subsectors improved to increase youth employment. 

Under this Sub-IR, the recipient will target specific regulations and policies hindering the growth 
of promising sectors and subsectors for youth employment. These constraints will be identified 
through the knowledge generation activities described under Sub-IR 1.2, and will be addressed 
through the coordination efforts described under Sub-IR 1.1. This work will build on Djibouti’s 
achievements in improving its “Doing Business'' ranking, with efforts tailored to the needs of the 
specific promising sectors and subsectors. While those achievements are significant, many private 
enterprises still face regulatory challenges in the areas of registering a business, opening a bank 
account, hiring and firing workers, and paying taxes. Continuing to alleviate these constraints will 
enable promising sectors and subsectors to grow and increase hiring. Additionally, the activity 
will advocate for broader improvements in the business enabling environment when relevant to 
target sectors and subsectors, and in coordination with initiatives under the World Bank and others 
that are directly targeting economy-wide policy constraints. 


 

Sub-IR 2.2: Non-regulatory constraints affecting promising sectors and subsectors reduced. 

The knowledge generation work described under Sub-IR 1.2 is also expected to identify non-
regulatory constraints that are hindering the growth of sectors and subsectors with substantial 
youth employment potential. Such constraints might include underskilled management, lack of 
access to finance, lack of market information or linkages to target markets, or the absence of an 
effective coalition of employers to identify efficiencies or advocate on behalf of common interests. 
Under this Sub-IR, the recipient will pursue market systems development strategies to alleviate 
these constraints, working collaboratively with the stakeholders convened under Sub-IR 1.1. For 
example, the activity might collaborate with the National Investment Promotion Agency, the 
World Bank, and other entities working to facilitate increased private sector investment to 
understand labor demand expected to result from upcoming Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), and 
work through IR3 to prepare youth to meet that demand. Specific employment related services 
firms hold contracts to recruit staff for upcoming FDI-related projects, and so could be particularly 
valuable partners. Additionally, the activity could draw on USAID support mechanisms such as 
CATALYZE to facilitate access to finance for individuals or groups of employers. Progress 
towards alleviating constraints will inform regular updates for workforce readiness programs 
about the youth employment potential, enabling them to shape training accordingly. This progress 
will also constitute the achievement of milestones, important measures of activity success. 

 

3. IR3: Youth workforce readiness strengthened 


 

This IR focuses on the labor supply and workforce readiness programs, particularly TVETs. Work 
under this IR will ensure that Djiboutian youth have the required skills and competencies that are 
attractive to potential employers, learn and contribute through internships, and secure quality 
employment. The activity will strive to be agile in responding to the promising sector and 
subsector opportunities identified under IR1, working within the stakeholder coordination 
structures to forecast the level of youth labor required at various points in the future. The activity 
will work with workforce readiness programs to ensure that appropriately-trained youth are 
available to meet that demand, preferably through internships negotiated with the employers in 
those promising sectors and subsectors. The USAID/Djibouti WFD program supported the work-
ready training of over 6,000 youth, a potential large pool on which to draw to meet existing or 
emerging labor demand. 

 

The activity will maintain productive linkages to the TVETs managed by MENFOP, General 
Education Sites, the University of Djibouti, and relevant CSOs, ensuring a clear and current 
understanding of the youth labor population. The activity will maintain productive partnerships 
with the TVETs in order to prepare them to meet the labor demand emerging from target sectors. 
(The activity is not expected to substantially influence the curricula of General Education Sites or 
the University of Djibouti.) The implementer will also maintain linkages to CSOs in a position to 
access populations of youth job seekers. Ideally the activity will identify the business case for 
firms in promising sectors and subsectors to invest in curriculum development, direct training 
provision, and in-kind support for technical/vocational education institutions, towards ensuring a 
well-trained labor pool from which to draw as the sector or subsector grows. 

 

While the work that will occur under this IR is critical, USAID expects that the interventions under 
this IR will be targeted, training will not be of a general nature, and will not be predominantly 


unfocused work ready now training. Instead the emphasis of this activity will primarily be on 
identifying or supporting the emergence of quality jobs for youth, and secondarily on preparing 
youth to secure those jobs. 

 

USAID envisions MENFOP and ANEFIP as the leading local stakeholders for this IR. The 
recipient will support MENFOP and ANEFIP to assume ownership of the interventions described 
in this section with the aim of sustainability beyond the life of the activity. 

 

Sub-IR 3.1: Integration of positive youth development (PYD) principles in workforce readiness 
programs enhanced. 

The recipient will draw on the PYD framework, and the substantial learning recently generated 
by USAID through initiatives such as YouthPower25 to ensure that workforce readiness programs 
support healthy, productive, and engaged youth. The implementer will work collaboratively with 
workforce readiness programs to use PYD methodologies to ensure that their core offerings meet 
the needs and preferences of the youth they serve. For example, the activity might work to ensure 
that youth are involved in the planning and implementation of the specific sector and subsector 
labor market analyses described under Sub-IR 1.2, which will strengthen the skills of youth in 
inquiry and assessment, leadership, teamwork, and communications, and increase their ability to 
assess market information for themselves. One particular challenge will be matching youth 
preferences with the sectors and subsectors that currently have, or are expected to have, jobs 
available. There is a widespread perception that Djiboutian youth prefer office-based work to more 
physical labor, and that even qualified youth are disinclined to actively search for job 
opportunities. The applicant should describe potential approaches to balancing the youth job 
seekers' preferences against the opportunities in the labor market, and provide possible techniques 
for identifying youth with existing interests in promising sectors and subsectors, and/or cultivating 
that interest in others. Additionally, the applicant should offer strategies to address stigmas 
attached to jobs for which the labor demand may be high, and awareness campaigns to help 
encourage youth to consider employment in these areas. 

25 https://www.youthpower.org/ 

 

Sub-IR 3.2: Provision of job skills, informed by direct private sector engagement, in workforce 
readiness programs improved. 

Under this Sub-IR the activity will support workforce preparation programs to equip youth with 
the technical skills needed to be successful in internships and employment. Some skills are 
expected to be valuable in multiple promising sectors and subsectors, particularly English 
language proficiency and skills in digital and information technology. While English language 
proficiency would be particularly relevant in the tourism sector, it would likely be valuable in 
other sectors and subsectors as well. 

 

Regarding digital and information technology, USAID/Djibouti has an agreement with CISCO 
Systems related to the CISCO Networking Academy program, a corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) initiative that will provide e-learning curricula, e-learning tools, and training for O/A $3 
million in-kind under this activity. USAID envisions that the recipient will engage CISCO with a 
scope focused on rolling out the Networking Academy model to all ten TVET centers 
simultaneously. The project will work with CISCO to identify and bring Master Trainers from the 
region to conduct training-of-trainers in Djibouti, provide the necessary hardware and provide 


three years of ongoing support to the TVETs. The recipient will be responsible for ensuring that 
this intervention is effectively incorporated into the overall Sub-IR 3.2 design, including working 
closely with MENFOP to roll the intervention out, track the success of the graduates, and generally 
ensure local ownership and sustainability. Bidders will have the opportunity to gain clarity about 
this component of the activity through the Q&A and at the pre-bid conference. USAID expects 
the specifics regarding how this intervention will be incorporated into the activity after discussion 
and agreement by the IP and CISCO during the three-month inception period described above, 
and recognizes that many of these specifics will not be available at the proposal stage. 

 

4. Crosscutting 


 

Learning and adaptive management 

The recipient will apply USAID’s approach to collaborating, learning, and adapting to this 
activity. In alignment with ADS 201.3.4.10.B, the recipient will integrate approaches to CLA that 
include: 

● Collaborating, where relevant. Collaboration activities may include joint work planning, 
regular partner meetings that facilitate knowledge sharing, and working groups organized 
along geographic or technical lines; 
● Involving USAID/Djibouti and other stakeholders in learning activities, such as pause and 
reflect sessions or after action reviews, as appropriate. 
● Using the knowledge and learning gained from implementation, opportunities to reflect on 
performance, monitoring data, evaluations, knowledge about the context, and other 
sources to adapt interventions and approaches as needed throughout the life of this activity. 


These practices will drive decision-making and activity adaptation in an intentional way that 
responds to new information and changes in context. The activity’s ability to focus on separate 
sectors and subsectors creates natural opportunities for iteration and learning. Each approach to a 
specific sector or subsector will include well-defined hypotheses and experiments, enabling the 
activity and its partners to test various approaches to understanding labor absorption potential, 
alleviating constraints to growth, and preparing Djiboutian youth to secure employment. This 
learning will be captured through regular pause and reflect activities, with learning disseminated 
to cross-functional teams working on other sectors and subsectors. The recipient is encouraged to 
be particularly willing to take risks regarding sectors and subsectors that might boost employment 
opportunities for youth in rural areas. The activity will focus on learning quickly and adapting, 
ensuring that milestones are achieved as efficiently as possible in terms of both time and expense. 

 

Additionally, USAID/Djibouti and USAID/Ethiopia are currently seeking new approaches to CLA 
that will allow it to more rapidly learn about the effectiveness of its programs so that it can adapt 
and improve throughout implementation. With support from the newly designed CLA Platform, 
still under procurement, USAID/Djibouti seeks to iteratively examine its theories of change, 
development hypotheses, and programming approaches to ensure development challenges are in 
alignment with solutions. By engaging with implementing partners through the new CLA 
Platform, USAID/Djibouti will achieve the following objectives: 

● Learn to drive program results more efficiently and effectively than traditional MEL; 
● Generate fit-for-purpose data to adapt and improve development programs; 
● Increase the Speed of Collaborating, Learning, and Adaptation; 



● Improve data literacy, including the ability to generate, comprehend, rigorously analyze, 
and apply data generated by both USAID and broader development actors; 
● Share CLA practices and expand the use of CLA across the OU’s implementing partners, 
and other Djibouti partners outside of government. 


The recipient will be expected to coordinate closely with the new CLA Platform. 

Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) 

A gender assessment conducted under the WFD Program found that the participation of girls 
steadily decreases as children move forward through the education system, with girls comprising 
only 43 percent of students by middle school. This trend continues through General Education 
Sites and TVETs, and into university. In vocational education, males generally receive industrial 
training while females receive administrative training or training in low level female-dominated 
areas such as laundry or baking. 

 

The assessment provided the following recommendations focused on strengthening gender 
equality in the TVET system: 

● Conduct employer needs assessments on a gender-neutral basis while informing employers 
that discrimination by gender is prohibited; 
● Recruit students on a gender-neutral basis with efforts to reach female students; 
● Require government-funded and donor-funded TVET programs to report on recruitment 
efforts directed at both genders, and maintain statistics accordingly; 
● Incorporate gender bias discussions into soft-skills training, especially for human 
resources training. 


 

Incorporating GESI principles throughout the activity is vital to achieving USAID development 
objectives. Building off of the assessment from the WFD program, the recipient should conduct 
an activity-specific GESI analysis at the beginning of program implementation, focusing on 
factors relevant to gender, persons with disabilities, and other disadvantaged groups, and develop 
a clear strategy to address any identified issues. The GESI analysis will identify: 

● Key government partners with which to maintain relationships and possibly partner on 
specific initiatives, including the Ministry of Youth, the Ministry of Women and Family, 
and the National Agency for Persons with Disabilities; 
● Relevant gender gaps in the status and anticipated levels of participation of women and 
men that could hinder the achievement of desired results; 
● Key gender inequalities or needs for female empowerment that could be addressed through 
the activity; 
● Any potentially differential effects (including unintended negative consequences) of 
activity interventions on women and men; 
● Factors preventing persons with disabilities from participating in the labor supply and 
securing quality employment. 


 

In particular, the recipient will consider the GESI implications in the selection of target sectors 
and subsectors. For each promising sector or subsector, the recipient will be encouraged to assess 
the current or potential employment opportunities for women and persons with disabilities, and 
the barriers to realizing those opportunities. The recipient will look for opportunities to collaborate 


with local stakeholders, such as supporting the work of the National Agency for Persons with 
Disabilities to sensitize employers to place more persons with disabilities in jobs. 

 

The recipient will also consider the current population of women and persons with disabilities in 
TVETs and other workforce readiness programs, and advocate for changes to increase the 
participation of these groups, and broaden the types of skills training in which they are 
participating. Additionally, the recipient will consider an inclusive advocacy approach focused on 
the right to work, decent work, labor rights, and social protections that increase equity and 
inclusion for vulnerable populations. 

 

The recipient will also seek to recruit female staff under this activity. 

 

Digital and Information Technology 

The activity will look for opportunities to introduce or strengthen context-appropriate digital and 
information technologies. In Djibouti and across the world, digital literacy and proficiency is an 
increasingly standard qualification for employment. The activity will work to enhance the extent 
to which workforce readiness programs incorporate digital and information technology in their 
curricula, including but not limited to supporting the entry of the CISCO Networking Academy 
program into the TVETs. Additionally, the activity will identify opportunities to introduce digital 
systems and technologies into the operations of businesses working in promising sectors and 
subsectors for youth employment. Enhancing the use of technology by employers has the potential 
both to improve business efficiency (increasing profits and supporting growth and additional 
hiring), and to make employment more attractive and exciting to youth job seekers. Supporting 
ANEFIP to strengthen the online Job Matching Platform, including expanding the number of 
employers posting openings and youth job seekers using the platform, is another avenue for 
making effective use of information technology. 

 

A.6 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING 

 

The recipient will employ an approach to MEL that will: 1) effectively track activity performance; 
2) inform program management and promote learning; 3) generate evidence on the localized and 
systemic changes that result from program interventions; and 4) support institutionalization of best 
practices for MEL within the GoDj using regular meetings and other feedback loops. 

In terms of catalyzing country learning, the recipient will focus on further strengthening the ability 
of ANEFIP and ONEQ to improve data collection, analysis, visualization, and dissemination. It is 
important that responsible staff within the GoDj have the skills to monitor, analyze, and assess 
various aspects of the labor demand and labor supply. The activity will join with existing efforts 
to put in place effective MEL systems, and identify where USAID can add value to emerging 
efforts in this area. 

In alignment with USAID guidelines on MEL, the recipient will measure both direct and indirect 
causal linkages among planned interventions, and changes in the programmatic context, such as 
shifts in stakeholder relationships, roles, rules, and resources. The recipient’s approach to MEL 
will maximize flexibility to respond to changes in the implementation or policy context as they 
emerge, and account for the intended and unintended system-wide effects of activity interventions. 

The recipient will also follow standard Data Quality Assurance procedures. 


Applicants are encouraged to review USAID’s latest thinking on PSE indicators and collaborate 
with the private sector in developing PSE MEL approaches.26 Illustrative standard indicators for 
this activity include: 

26 PSE MEL: Standard Agency PSE Indicators and Harmonizing Indicator Tool | USAID Learning Lab 

● EG.6-12 Percent of individuals with new employment following participation in USG-
assisted workforce development programs. 
● EG.6-14 Percent of individuals who complete USG-assisted workforce development 
programs. 
● EG.7.3-1: Number of laws, policies, regulations, or standards to enhance energy sector 
governance formally proposed, adopted, or implemented as supported by USG assistance 
● YOUTH-3: Percentage of participants who are youth (15-29) in USG-assisted programs 
designed to increase access to productive economic resources [IM-level] 


 

All individual-level indicators must be disaggregated by sex. Other applicable disaggregates for 
the activity include age, geography, and persons with disabilities. 

 

Applicants are encouraged to recommend additional custom indicators relevant to proposed 
strategies and approaches. In particular, applicants are encouraged to draw on effective approaches 
from market systems development methodology to develop a thoughtful approach to measuring 
and tracking progress towards alleviating constraints in promising sectors and subsectors. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ATTACHMENT 1 – ACTIVITY RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID/Djibouti intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of 
funding opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, 
USAID/Djibouti intends to provide about USD 16 million in total over four years. 

 

In addition, the CISCO Network Academy will provide O/A $3 million of capacity building 
activity as in-kind contribution for interventions in the ICT space. 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications. 

 

B.2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data 
Collection 

Please see Section A.6 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING 

 

B.2 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is four years. The estimated start date will be 
December 2022. 

 

B.3 Type of Award and Substantial Involvement 

 

USAID plans to negotiate and award an assistance instrument known as a Cooperative 
Agreement with the successful applicant for this program. Potential applicants should note 
that USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit under assistance instruments. 

 

A Cooperative Agreement implies a level of “substantial involvement” by USAID (see ADS 
303.3.11). This substantial involvement will be through the Agreement Officer, except to the 
extent that the Agreement Officer delegates authority to the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) in writing. The intended purpose of the substantial involvement during 
the award is to assist the recipient in achieving the supported objectives of the agreement. The 
anticipated substantial involvement elements for this award are listed below (this list does not 
include approvals required by Standard Mandatory Provisions for Non-US NGOs or other 
applicable law, regulation or provision): 

 

3.1. Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans, including but not limited to, annual 
work plans, life-of-project exit strategy, and any subsequent revisions of such plans. If at the 
time of award, the program description does not establish a timeline in sufficient detail for the 
planned achievement of milestones or outputs, USAID may delay approval of the recipient’s 
implementation plans for a later date. USAID must not require approval of implementation 
plans more often than annually. If the AO has delegated authority to the AOR to approve 


implementation plans, the AOR must review the agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure 
that changes to the terms and conditions are not inadvertently approved by the AOR. 

 

3.2. Approval of Specified Key Personnel USAID may designate as key personnel only those 
positions that are essential to the successful implementation of the Recipient’s program. 
USAID’s policy limits this to a reasonable number of positions, generally no more than five 
positions or five percent of Recipient employees working under the award, whichever is 
greater. 

 

3.3. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation in implementation, 
including, but not limited to, participation in advisory committees and direction and/or 
redirection of activities specified in the program description due to GoDj’s priorities and 
guidance as well as interrelationships with other programs. 

 

a) Concurrence on the Substantive Provisions of Sub-Awards. 2 CFR 200.308 already 
requires the recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or 
contracting out of any work under an award. 


 

b) Approval of the Learning, Monitoring & Evaluation Plan (LME) – the LME Plan 
will be developed in consultation with USAID/Djibouti. During the initial project 
planning period, the recipient shall work closely with USAID/Djibouti to ensure that 
the LMEplan clearly links the Recipient’s activity with the objectives and targeted 
outcomes of the Program Description. The jointly developed LMEplan shall be 
submitted within 90 calendar days of the award. 


 

c) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the 
program description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. Direction 
of Redirection of activities specified in the program description due to GoDj’s priorities 
and guidance as well as interrelationships with other programs. 


 

d) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory/governance committee members 
and participation in the advisory committee, if the program will establish an advisory 
committee that provides advice to the recipient. 


 

3.4. Agency Authority to Immediately Halt Construction. 

 

 

B.4 Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 
937. 

 

B.5 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 


The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is 
to transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of USAID/Djibouti 
Youth Employment Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient 
will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient 
and effective administration of the award through the application of sound management 
practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner 
consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of 
the Federal award. 

 

B.6. Selection of Instrument 

 

Due to the nature of the collaboration implicit in the USAID/Djibouti Youth Employment 
Activity, USAID/Djibouti believes that a Cooperative Agreements (in which substantial 
involvement will include approval of Implementation Plans, Key Personnel, and Agency and 
Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation) will likely be the primary vehicle for this 
initiative, but the actual award type or engagement will depend upon the most appropriate 
mechanism or approach for the intended results. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 

 


 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 Eligible Applicants 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial 
assistance on the same basis as any other organization and are subject to the protections and 
requirements of Federal law. 

 

C.2 Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

Cost Sharing is not required for this activity, though it is encouraged, and the use of cost 
share funds may lead to a program with greater impact. 

 

C.3 Number of Applications that May be Submitted 

 

Any one entity/organization may submit one (1) application for funding in response to this 
Notice of Funding Opportunity NOFO as a prime awardee. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1. Agency Point of Contacts 

 

Name: Tsegereda Gebremedhin 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email Addresses: tgebremedhin@usaid.gov and 
caddis@usaid.gov 

Name: Alula Abera 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email Addresses: alabera@usaid.gov 

D.2 Questions and Answers 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted through e-mail addresses to 
caddis@usaid.gov and Tsegereda Gebremedhin at tgebremedhin@usaid.gov . The 
subject line must state “Questions on “USAID/Djibouti – Youth Employment 
Activity; 72060322RFA000000” no later than the date and time indicated on the 
cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a prospective applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants 
as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting 
applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

D.3 General Content and Form of Application 

 

USAID/Djibouti will accept applications from qualified entities as defined in Section 
C of this NOFO. The Applicant should follow the instructions set forth herein. If an 
applicant does not follow the instructions, the application may be downgraded and may 
not receive full credit under the applicable merit review criteria, or, at the discretion of 
the Agreement Officer, be eliminated from the competition. 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must 
be submitted in two separate parts: - the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) 
Application. This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the 
full application. Please see subsections D.5 and D.6, below, for information on the 
content specific to the Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The Technical 
application must address technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application 
must present the costs, and address risk and other related issues. 

 


Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) 
number: 

 



 

Applicant name: 

 

 

Activity title: 

 

 

Total USAID funds requested: 

 

 



 

Proposed period of performance: 

 

 

Applicant name: 

 

 



 

Applicant’s full address and telephone number 

(primary or lead applicant) 

 

 

Identification and signature of the primary 
contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email 
address) and the identification of the alternate 
contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email 
address) 

 

 

Name of any proposed sub-recipients or 
partnerships (identify if any of the 

 




organizations are local organizations, per 
USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 
303. 

 

Name and Signature of Individuals authorized 
to negotiate terms, conditions and countersigns 
the award (title/ position, email address, 
telephone number) 

 

UEI numbers of applicants and sub-awardees/ 
partners. Tax identification number, and Letter 

of Credit (LOC) number for the applicant, if 
available. 

 



 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied 
by evidence of that agent’s authority unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as 
part of the merit review criteria. 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 11-point Times New Roman font, 
1 or 1.5” margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including 
consecutive page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with 
the 11 point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted 
in addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do 
so may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 


D.4 Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and 
time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor 
considered. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated 
documentation of delivery receipt date and time and/or confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

 Email submission 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to caddis@usaid.gov with a copy to Ms. Tsegereda 
Gebremedhin at tgebremedhin@usaid.gov. Email submissions must include the NOFO 
number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent 
by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the technical 
or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g., "No. 1 
of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email 
should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost 
Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

Telegraphic or faxed or hard copy applications are not authorized for this NOFO and will not 
be accepted. 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate 
in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the 
same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a 
"corrected" email. 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry 
to the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/ cannot guarantee their 
acceptance by the internet server. Each email with file attachments must not exceed 20MB in 
size. 

For uploading to Grants.gov: 

Applicants may upload applications to http://www.grants.gov. USAID bears no responsibility 
for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion processes associated with electronic 
submissions. 

For hard copy submission: 

 Hard copy applications must be submitted in two separate envelopes: (a) technical and (b) 
business (cost) application addressed to: 


(a) Cover Page (as discussed above); 
(b) Table of Contents: 
(c) Executive Summary (one page) 
(d) Technical Application Body (not to exceed 15/fifteen) pages excluding annexes); 











{insert the physical address} 

 The outside of the envelope/package must include the following information: 

● Due date and time of the application package 

● NOFO number 

● Name of the USAID POC 

● Name and address of the applicant 

The hard copy technical application must consist of one (1) original and 1 copy. The cost or 
business application must consist of one (1) original and 1 copy. 

 

D.5 Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The 
application must demonstrate the applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the goals of this activity. The application should take into account the requirements 
of the program and merit review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The Technical Application should consist of the following: 

 

 

Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit 
review criteria. 

 

 

The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the 
Technical Application. 

Based on the Merit Review Criteria, the Technical Application Body will contain the 
following sections: 

1. Technical Approach 
2. Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
3. Personnel and Management Approach 
4. Institutional Capacity and Experience 


 

The basic purpose of the Technical Application Body is to provide the information necessary 
to allow USAID/Djibouti to evaluate the applicants fairly and completely under each of the 
merit review criteria specified in Section E of this NOFO. Additional specific guidance for 
each Section of the Merit Review Application Body is set forth below: 

 


1. Technical Approach 


 

Applicants are required to propose a comprehensive approach to achieve the activity’s 
intermediate results and ensure that interventions are sustainable. A high level of coordination 
with other partners is required. The technical application must describe in detail the approaches 
it will employ to achieve programmatic objectives. The application should outline links 
between the proposed results, conceptual approach, performance milestones, and a realistic 
timeline for achieving the semi-annual, annual, and end of project results. Applicants should 
prioritize evidence-based, locally appropriate and cost-effective approaches, and are 
encouraged to propose innovative activities to achieve desired results. A high level of 
coordination with other USG-funded awards is required. 

 

Applicants are strongly encouraged to describe the evidence-based strategies and approaches 
they will undertake to support job creation in Djibouti. Applications will be further 
strengthened by describing strategies or approaches that could lead to an increased availability 
of quality jobs for Djiboutians. The application should explain how their proposed approaches 
or strategies will contribute to an increased youth employment through strengthened workforce 
programs, understanding of the needs of the job market and expanded links to quality jobs. The 
application should emphasize how it will engage the Djiboutian private sector through the 
chamber of commerce, outlining a detailed description of strategies and approaches it will 
utilize in identifying the various promising sectors that will create/provide employment. 

While Applicants have flexibility to propose their own solutions and innovations, expected 
results are described for each IRs to guide applicants in preparing their applications. Upon 
award, the Recipient is expected to mobilize personnel and engage the GoDj and other 
stakeholders in a consultative and participatory process (post award co-design) to develop a 
work plan to achieve the results of the YE activity. 

 

The YE activity will begin with a three-month inception period during which time the 
implementing partner will work with MENFOP, the Ministry of labor, the private sector and 
the Chamber of Commerce (CCD), other development partners, any other activity sub-partners 
included in the offeror’s application, and other stakeholders to finalize work planning for the 
YE activity. The implementing partner will also engage local stakeholders to conduct 
contextual and other types of assessments to refine the activity work plan, as necessary. 
Examples of some of these assessments are described above and under corresponding 
intermediate and sub-intermediate results. During the inception period, it will be important to 
align the YE activity with efforts already underway to increase employment with greater 
access, equity, and effectiveness, determining where USAID efforts can add most value based 
on work done to date and unmet need. It will also be critical for the Recipient to understand 
and build on the past successes and lessons learned from the recently concluded USAID 
Employment Activity in Djibouti. 

 

The technical application should: 1) demonstrate understanding of challenges currently facing 
the dynamic of Djibouti’s labor market as well as obstacles that are preventing the private 
sector from hiring available Djiboutians labor force, including a clear understanding of main 
regulatory and non-regulatory constraints; 2) propose clear, innovative, appropriate and 
sustainable technical approaches to work with the Ministry of National Education and 


Vocational Training, the Ministry of Labor through ANEFIP and the Chamber of Commerce 
to achieve the objectives and results of increased youth employment through strengthened 
workforce programs. Specifically, the application should describe how all these and other 
stakeholders will be brought together for an increased governance in support of effective 
coordination between key players; 3) demonstrate knowledge of key policies and strategies in 
the area of Djibouti youth and workforce development ; 4) demonstrate a clear understanding 
of major constraints facing the supply side of the labor market, particularly challenges and 
opportunities within the TVET institutions; 5) demonstrate a clear understanding of key 
constraints facing the demand side of the labor market and propose innovative approaches and 
solutions in response to these challenges; 6) describe how the activity will integrate the 
principle of USAID Positive youth development( PYD) framework in all workforce readiness 
programs; 7) propose a logical and coherent four-year overall timeline and plan that 
demonstrate program approaches, objectives and expected results; 8) propose planning that 
shows considerations for flexibility and adaptive management approaches to respond to 
unexpected events or demands; 9) propose a clear strategy in coordinating and creating 
synergies with others youth workforce activities funded by other donors namely the World 
bank and the French development agency to avoid overlap of interventions; and 9) describe 
how the activity will build on and leverage on the success of the previous USAID-funded WFD 
activity. 

 

2. Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (not to exceed 5 pages) 


 

USAID has integrated Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) into all aspects of its 
operations and programming to achieve better development outcomes. This involves strategic 
collaboration, systematic and continuous learning, and adaptive management. Applicants 
should discuss approaches how they will implement CLA in YE activity and should think 
strategically about: 

 

● How does the applicant take the time to think critically about its work? (Learning) 
● Is the applicant strategic with whom to collaborate with, what it is learning? and 
(Collaborating) 
● Does the applicant use those learnings to change accordingly? (Adapting) 


 

MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING (MEL) 

 

The Recipient will employ an approach to MEL that will: 1) effectively track activity 
performance; 2) inform program management and promote learning; 3) generate evidence on 
the localized and systemic changes that result from program interventions; and 4) support 
institutionalization of best practices for MEL within the GoDj using regular meetings and other 
feedback loops. It is essential that MENFOP, ANEFIP, and Djiboutian stakeholders create and 
maintain a strong monitoring and evaluation M&E system, and that responsible staff have the 
skills to monitor, analyze, and assess various facets of YE programs. The YE activity will join 
existing efforts to put in place effective M&E systems. 

 

Additionally, the YE activity will work closely with a new CLA platform (currently in 
procurement) that USAID/Djibouti and USAID/Ethiopia are developing to conduct M&E 
throughout the life of the activity. The platform will support new approaches to CLA that will 


allow USAID/Djibouti and USAID/Ethiopia to more rapidly assess the effectiveness of the 
programs so that they can adapt and improve. The new platform will allow the missions to 
iteratively examine theories of change, development hypotheses, and programming 
approaches, to ensure development challenges align with proposed solutions. By engaging with 
implementing partners through the CLA platform, USAID/Djibouti will achieve the following 
objectives: 

 

● Learn to drive program results more efficiently and effectively than traditional MEL. 

● Generate fit-for-purpose data to adapt and improve development programs. 

● Increase the speed of CLA. 

● Improve data literacy, including the ability to generate, comprehend, rigorously 
analyze, and apply data generated by both USAID and broader development actors. 

● Share CLA practices and expand the use of CLA of implementing partners and other 

Djiboutian stakeholders outside of government. 

 

The YE activity will collect data on its progress towards the identified results. The Learning, 
Monitoring, and Evaluation (MEL) Plan will define a sound and realistic approach to measure 
the quality, effectiveness, and outcomes of YE activity implementation. Activity monitoring 
must be based on monitoring methods that will allow staff to measure and track activity 
progress on multiple levels and to make adjustments as needed. The YE activity will work with 
key GoDj and other stakeholders to develop a system for tracking cohorts of trained youth and 
jobs secured, including a pre/post assessment of their employment situation throughout the 
intervention period. A strong MEL system will facilitate monitoring of detailed activities and 
allow for adaptive management. It will also create opportunities to work with the GoDj to take 
budget responsibility and identify good YE practices. The YE activity will collect quantitative 
and qualitative data using appropriate tools, as well as through direct observations of 
interventions to ensure effectiveness and measure progress toward achieving targets. The MEL 
Plan must uphold standards of data quality (accuracy, validity, reliability, timeliness, and 
integrity) throughout the data collection process. Staff and stakeholders involved in data 
collection, aggregation, and calculation must be trained by the YE activity to ensure that high 
standards of data quality are met whenever they perform data related activities. The YE activity 
offers the potential to feed research on effective youth and workforce development policy 
reforms in developing countries and conduct longitudinal research on the impact and 
effectiveness of interventions by different variables (national/sub-national, male/female, 
rural/urban, language of instruction, disability status, household economic level, etc.). 

 

Applicants are required to submit a preliminary MEL Plan with their applications. The MEL 
Plan will be finalized in consultation with USAID and approved by the USAID AOR during 
the three-month inception period post-award. At that time, the recipient will work with USAID 
to develop custom indicators that respond to USAID’s needs. Illustrative standard USAID 
indicators will be shared with the successful applicant who may draw from these indicators or 
recommend different or additional custom indicators relevant to proposed strategies and 
approaches for inclusion in the preliminary MEL Plan, if desired. The recipient will need to 
produce data on the indicators at the frequency and level of disaggregation required by USAID. 
Quantitative and qualitative approaches to measure systems change will be used to guide 


interventions and test results chain hypotheses. 

 

3. Personnel and Management Approach 


 

The Applicant should provide an overview of the proposed key personnel, their qualifications 
and experience, and relevant curriculum vitae and references. Applicants should include how 
they will organize its staff, including sub-partners to achieve the goals and objectives of the 
NoFO. The management plan should describe how the project will relate to and respond to 
USAID. The potential award winner will present a detailed and comprehensive activity human 
resource management plan that can deliver all the expected results under the YE activity. The 
potential award winner’s human resource requirement for key staff must have the educational 
qualification, relevant experience and skills in (1) leading, managing and administering USAID 
relevant programs and activities; (2) The relevant subject matter technical knowledge includes 
in-depth knowledge on topics such as youth workforce development, labor market needs, 
economic growth and labor economics as well as technical/vocational education, experience 
and expertise in working with the private sector; (3) experience in working with different 
stakeholders working and supporting youth workforce development activities; these include 
policy makers, private sector and technical/vocational education institutions; 4) experience 
working on improving the enabling environment for youth employment, particularly the 
regulatory and non-regulatory constraints affecting the labor market. 

 

● Organizational Structure - Proposed overall staffing plan and organizational chart 
indicating the organization planned for the field (including any proposed sub-
recipients) and headquarters. The plan shall specify the composition and organizational 
structure of the proposed implementation team and describe each staff member's role, 
technical expertise and the estimated amount of time each member of the team will 
devote to the Program. Identify by title and name each position to be supported under 
the Program for the field office, as well as for any support staff based abroad. 


 

● To comply with USAID/Djibouti’s commitment to use existing local capacity to the 
greatest extent possible, the implementer will hire local staff for its field offices. 
Detailed description of the credentials, skills, prior successful experience and 
accomplishments of proposed key personnel must be provided. According to desired 
results the Application shall describe regional and/or headquarters resources that will 
be made available to ensure maximum technical and administrative support. 


 

● Policies and Procedures - Proposed policies and procedures for managing and 
directing the effort to ensure productivity, quality, cost control, and early identification 
and resolution of difficulties. Standard corporate policies and practices documentation 
submitted for Agreement Officer responsibility determination may be referenced, 
however the intent here is to highlight (unique) policies that may be created specifically 
in responding to the NOFO. 


 

● Implementation Planning – This must illustrate how the applicant intends to 
implement a management plan that contributes to the achievement of the stated results. 
The application shall contain a detailed Mobilization Plan showing when field staff will 
be mobilized in Djibouti Ethiopia as well as the startup of field office(s) if any. 



 

Applicants will be expected to present a sound description for the management and staffing of 
the activity. The applicant should propose an overall staffing pattern that demonstrates the 
breadth and depth of technical expertise and experience required to implement this broad 
activity. The staffing plan should demonstrate a solid understanding of key technical and 
organizational requirements and an appropriate mix of skills, while avoiding excessive 
staffing. Key personnel should demonstrate state-of-the-art expertise in international 
standards. This section should include: (1) a detailed organizational chart; (2) a brief 
description of key personnel; and (3) a skills matrix for proposed project staff. 

 

CVs of proposed key personnel and other staff are to be included in an annex. All key 
personnel CVs should include three references with contact information. Letters of 
commitment are required for all key personnel and should be included in an annex. Noting 
that all staff may not be available or needed at inception, dates that key personnel are available 
to start work full-time with the YE activity are also required. 

 

⮚ A brief discussion of the skills, experience, and education of the three key personnel 
positions, which are considered essential for implementation of the activity is set forth 
below. These key personnel positions are: 


 

1. Chief of Party 
2. Deputy Chief of Party 
3. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Specialist 
4. Can be recommended in application by applicant 
5. Can be recommended in application by applicant 


 

1. Chief of Party 


 

Description: S/he will have the overall responsibility for leading and coordination of all 
activities and all staff management. S/he will have principal responsibility for representation 
of the activity to USAID. S/he should be able to manage financial and human resources 
effectively and exhibit a breadth of both technical expertise and management experience 
appropriate to fulfill the diverse requirements of this activity. 

 

Qualifications: PhD or master’s degree in Economics, social sciences, of economic, labor 
economics, development studies, business administration or other related field, with deep 
understanding and knowledge of private sector, Technical/vocational and youth workforce 
development programs. At least 12 years of demonstrated experience managing operational, 
project management and administrative duties for similar and relevant USG activities or other 
internationally funded programs. Experience in Africa and English and French language 
fluency. 

 

2. Deputy chief of party 


 

Description: The Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) identified as local staff directly assists the 
COP in activity planning, implementation and management. The DCOP shall have 
complementary technical skills and experience with the COP. The DCOP is responsible for 


various technical components of the activity and makes operational decisions in the absence of 
the COP, fluency in the French language and excellent English skills in speaking and writing. 
This position will serve as the alter ego of the COP. 

 

Qualifications: Master's in economics, labor economics, social sciences, or related field with 
an understanding and knowledge of the Djibouti labor market, youth workforce development 
and technical/vocational education programs. Knowledge of the context and particularly the 
challenges facing youth employment in Djibouti is helpful. At least 8 years of demonstrated 
experience managing youth workforce development projects and operations for U.S. 
government and/or other international donors. 

 

3. Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 


 

Description: This individual will lead the monitoring, evaluation, learning and research 
efforts. S/he shall develop/design, monitoring, evaluation and reporting (MER) systems, 
evaluations. S/he shall ensure that systems include appropriate indicators, baseline data, targets 
and a plan to evaluate performance and produce timely, accurate and complete reporting. The 
specialist has the responsibility for information analysis and must be able to develop 
monitoring, evaluation and learning plans. 

 

Qualifications: Master's in education, economics, science, statistics. A deep knowledge and 
expertise in monitoring and evaluation systems, with deep understanding of youth workforce 
quantitative and qualitative research as well assessment of training impact. Knowledge of the 
Djibouti labor market system is helpful as is knowledge of the Djibouti technical/vocational 
training context. S/he should have at least 6 years of demonstrated experience in monitoring 
youth workforce development projects, funded by USG or other development partners. 

 

4. Institutional capacity and experience 

 

Applications must include a detailed management plan/implementation schedule in support of 
proposed activities. The applicant must present the relevant, specialized competence that itself 
and each member will contribute. This shall include demonstrated accomplishments and 
institutional capability to carry out activities of the type required under this activity. The 
management plan must include descriptions of the following elements: 

 

● Participating Organizations - Relationships between Applicant and other proposed 
organizations, if any, shall be clearly described. (Note: Cisco has signed an MOU with 
USAID/Djibouti committing to providing significant involvement in the YE activity.) 
This shall include a description of the comparative advantage that each organization 
brings to this activity. Note that USAID will only commit to a bilateral relationship so 
consortium and joint-venture arrangements must designate (authorize) one legal 
entity/individual able to bind all partners in the application to the Government. 


 

A description of the applicant’s technical and administrative experience and capabilities in the 
proposed activity area must be included, such as experience in the scientific/programmatic 
area, collaborating with multiple stakeholders, developing research capacity in low- and 
middle-income countries, managing and implementing projects of similar technical scope and 


complexity. If sub-awards with other organizations are proposed, to the extent possible, 
pertinent aspects such as technical roles, management relationships and levels of effort of the 
organizations and individuals involved in the sub-award must be explicitly defined. The 
experience information shall include narrative highlights, reference information, project 
summaries, etc. and special requirements such as experience in the region or in specific 
technical areas. 

 

(e) Annexes 

 

Annexes should be numbered (e.g. Annex 1). If any part of the Technical Application exceeds 
the page limits specified above, USAID/Djibouti may decide to consider and review ONLY 
those pages up to the applicable limit when evaluating the Application. 

The Appendices, which are not included in the main Technical Application’s 15-page limit, 
must include the following items: 

1) Expanded Logic Model, based on the logic model outlined in the Program Description, 
with draft sub-intermediate results, indicators, baseline and performance targets. 
2) Timeline of milestones from the beginning to the completion of the proposed activities, 
including all deliverables; monitoring, evaluation, and learning; and dissemination of 
reports and information 
3) Resumes for Key Personnel and any essential co-implementers for the proposed 
activity not to exceed three (3) pages each 
4) Additional relevant materials [up to five (5) pages] may also be provided as an 
appendix. These may include the history, structure, accomplishments, and capacity of 
the applicant organization(s). 
a. Technical Approach Charts, Graphs and Maps, and Logical 
Framework 


The Applicant is authorized to include any charts, graphs or maps, and a Logical 
Framework that supports the Technical Approach Section in the Merit Review 
Application Body. 

b. Resumes/CVs & Letters of Commitment 


i. Proposed Key Personnel CVs (no more than 3 pages per individual) 

ii. Key Personnel proposed minimum requirements (1 page per position) 

Each resume shall be accompanied with a commitment letter from each candidate 
indicating his or her: (a) availability to serve in the stated position, in terms of days 
after the award; (b) intention to serve for the stated term of service; and (c) agreement 
to the compensation levels which correspond to the levels set forth in the cost 


application. Each resume shall include a minimum of three (3) references of 
professional contacts within the last five years; with complete current contact 
information, including email addresses and telephone numbers, for each proposed key 
personnel candidate. 

c. Organizational Chart 
1. Cover Page: 
2. SF 424 Form(s): 





This annex should consist of a chart showing the proposed organization for the 
Program; this chart should include, but is not limited to, a representation of the staff 
reporting lines and relationships between the different positions that fully illustrates the 
management structure of both full time and non-full-time staff for the Recipient and all 
sub-recipients; it should be sufficient to illustrate the complete human resources needs 
necessary to achieve the objectives of this Activity. 

 

D.6 Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as 
concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The Business (Cost) application 
must include: 1. Cover Page; 2. SF 424 Forms; 3. Required Certifications and Assurances; 4. 
Other Budget Information; 5. Prior Approvals; 6. Subawards; 7. D&B/SAM; 8. Performance 
History; 9. Branding and Marking; 10. Funding Restrictions; and 11. Conflict of Interest. 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed 
necessary for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 
200.205. Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial 
application. 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated 
below): 

Please see Subsection D.3 above for requirements. 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard 
Forms can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for 
SF424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424instructions.html 

Application for 

Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 




3. Required Certifications and Assurances: 





Instructions for 
SF424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424ainstructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for 
SF424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424binstructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

The applicant must include the following documents and submit a signed copy as part of the 
Business (Cost) Application: 

 

i. “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
ii. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
iii. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance 
if your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office 
of Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 
(i) Guidelines: The following general guidelines apply. 
A. The Cost Application should be for a period of 48 months. 
B. Budget should be stated in US Dollars and the USAID/Djibouti 
support should total approximately $16 million. 
C. Applicants should assume notification of an award as set forth in 
Section B.2. 



(ii) Spreadsheets Required: The following spreadsheets are required: 
A. A Summary Spreadsheet showing the cost for the major cost 
categories identified. 
B. Separate detailed budgets that provide sufficient detailed information at the 
individual cost line item that is sufficient to allow USAID/Djibouti to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to 
implement the applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with 
the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. The types of costs should 
be organized based on the cost categories specified above in Section D.6 








 

 4. Other Budgetary Information: 

In addition, the following budgetary information should be provided in the Cost Application. 


and Annex 1. This budget should contain total amounts for each line item 
of cost for the entire 48-month period (not only should total amount of 
dollars over 48 months for each cost line item be included but the 
cumulative number of units – days, trips, months etc. should also be 
summed). 



(iii) Spreadsheet Format: The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected 





 C. Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, 

broken out by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation 

period of the project. Separate sheets that breakdown the costs specified in 
Subsection B above to each of the four program years. NOTE: Applicants can 
alternatively include the detailed cost breakdown per year in the overall 48-
month summary described above. 

 

Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) with visible formulas and 
references and must be broken out by project year, including itemization of 
the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any 
hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen 
the cost analysis time required to review the application and may result in a 
rejection of the cost application. 

 

(iv) Sub-contracts/Sub-agreements: The budget shall include a summary and 
breakdown of the costs allocated for each sub-recipient or sub-contractor 
involved in the activity (unless the agreement or contract is on a fixed amount 
basis). While it is preferred that detailed subcontract or sub-agreement costs be 
included in the overall detailed spreadsheet(s) described above, applicants have 
the option of including separate sub-agreement or subcontract budgets for the 
sake of clarity. 
(v) Budget Notes: Budget notes are required. These budget notes must provide an 
accompanying narrative by line item which explains in detail the basis for how 
the individual line-item costs were derived. The budget notes must be sufficient 
to ensure that USAID/ can determine the purpose of every cost item proposed, 
as well as understand the basis for the cost estimate (units and unit cost). 
(vi) Budget Categories: The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget 
categories and information, at a minimum and provides guidance on budget 
category costs. 
A. Salaries – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation 
- Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, 
salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. 
The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for 
similar work in other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide 
their established written policies on personnel compensation. If the 






applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of 
compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe 
the rationale used and support market research. 
B. Fringe Benefits & Allowances – If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate 
approved by an agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such 
rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an applicant does not have a 
fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose a rate and explain 
how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative 
must include a detailed breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. 
dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 
C. Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the 
trips, the number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of 
individuals traveling, and the duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated 
travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel policies. When 
appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, 
such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. 
D. Equipment and Supplies – Must include information on estimated types of 
equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and quantity. The Budget 
Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the 
basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of 
any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs 
of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives 
available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property 
leased. 





Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by 
position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

NOTE: In accordance with 2CFR 200, “Equipment” means tangible 
personal property (including information technology systems) having a 
useful life of more than one year and a per-unit acquisition cost which 
equals or exceeds the lesser of the capitalization level established by the 
non-Federal entity for financial statement purposes, or $5,000. All 
equipment must be listed in a separate budget line item. 

F. Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed 

 through to any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining 

 whether the sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient 

 budgets must align with the same requirements as the applicant’s budget, 

 including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 

 


E. Contractual – Must include costs of direct program activities, monitoring, 
evaluation, and learning costs, consultants, trainings, workshops, 
monitoring, evaluation and learning costs, conferences, campaigns, 
consultants, sub awards and other direct program implementation costs. 
Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to 
any subrecipient. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether 
the sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets 
must align with the same requirements as the applicant’s budget, including 
those related to fringe and indirect costs. The applicant should indicate the 
subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and 
their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of 
costs. 
F. Construction – NOT APPLICABLE 
G. Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, 
such as report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams 
and inoculations, equipment rental, office rent, utilities, communication, 
maintenance or service costs, costs associated with implementation of 
Branding and Marking Plan, costs for services not part of the technical 
scope/delivery of the award (i.e. logistical support services) as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by 
the applicant. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental 
costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of 
comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives 
available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property 
leased. 
H. Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing 
indirect costs or will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand 
indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. The application must 
identify which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable 
supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost 
Rate methods: 





Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG 

Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, 
submit your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If 
your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the 
contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the 
Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject 


to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non 
Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA Initial 
Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either 
indirect or direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently 
charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected must be used 
consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity 
chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may 
apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements 
it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further 
information. 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non-U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may 
request, but approval is at the discretion of the AO Initial Application 
Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and 
estimates for the current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of 
the organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of 
executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that 
benefit and are identifiable to more than one program or activity, such 


as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, 
and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for 
the current year 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and 
consistently across all programs and activities of using a base that 
measures the benefits of that particular cost to each program or activity 
to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to 
utilize the 10% de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further 
instructions and may request additional supporting information, including 
financial statements and audits, should the application still be under 
consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to 
approve the applicant’s requested method. 

 

5. History of Performance: 

 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for 
all its cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving 


similar or related programs, that have been awarded or completed in the last three years, 
as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization. 

• Award Number. 

• Activity Title. 

• A brief description of the activity. 

• Period of Performance. 

• Award Amount. 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly 
observed the work at the organization for which the service was performed with 
complete current contact information including telephone number, and e-mail 
address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide 
a short explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide 
general information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant 
information concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and 
may consider such information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may 
request additional information and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it 
is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

See “ANNEX 3: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (PPI) to be completed by 
the applicant” for template. 

 

6. Prior Approvals in Accordance with 2 CFR 200.407: 


Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost in this Section. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information 
regarding which cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

7. Approval of Subawards: 


 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award in this Section. For each proposed subaward, the applicant must provide the 
following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• UEI Number 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s 


Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 

• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 



• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security 
designation list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

8. Unique Entity Identification and SAM Requirements: 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifiers and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted 
from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal 
awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid UEI for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients. 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting 
to make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under 
consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine 
that the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for 
making an award to another applicant. 

 

UEI/SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to 
Help, then to International Registrants. 

 

Applicants should address the status of these registrations in this section. 

 

 

9. Branding Strategy and Marking Plan: 


 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any 
resulting award. 

 


Pursuant to ADS 303.3.6.2.f and ADS 320.3.1.2, the applicant is required to submit a Branding 
Strategy and Marking Plan in this Section of the Business (Cost) Application. These plans shall 
be prepared in accordance with the guidance in ADS 320.3.1.2, 2 CFR 700.16 and the 
references therein. 

 

USAID/ does not intend to make an award without an approved Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan. The following pre-award terms in ADS 303mba entitled “Branding Strategy 
– Assistance” and “Marking Plan – Assistance” are relevant: 

 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how 
it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers 
no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the 
budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with 
the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the 
grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 
(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 
(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found 
on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the 
NOFO or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 








 

 

 


(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant 
must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 
(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. Section VI of the NOFO or APS will state if an Administrator approved the 
use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 



(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 
(i) Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcements, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and 
so forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 



(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 
(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials 
and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly 
acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 





 

 

 “USAID is from the American People.” 

 

 

 

e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 
applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 


 

2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other 
items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and 
brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official 
marking for the Agency and is found on the USAID Web site at 



http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the NOFO or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the 
budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with 
the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the 
grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 
the applicant plans to produce, and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the 
award, including: 
(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature. 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by 
USAID. 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the 
USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise 
acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 



(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 
(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity. 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
Deliverables. 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 
and where the applicant will place the marking. 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity, and 








 

 

 

 


(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 



(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of why 
the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking 
requirements would: 
(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and 
materials. The applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim 
Result, or program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an 
aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable 
item, examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be independent. The applicant must 
explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 
particular item or product is better positioned as a host-country government item or 
product. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must 
identify the relevant norm and explain why marking would violate that norm or 
otherwise be inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international 
law violated by the marking. 








 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the 
item or commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and 
will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to 
ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives 
of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 


 

10. Funding Restrictions: 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. Applicants 
will be reimbursed only for costs that benefit the program description and are allocable, 
allowable and reasonable. Pre-award costs may be reimbursed under the resulting award, but 
only with the prior specific written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 


This program does not have any provision for capital funding or any type of construction 
assistance. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services 
that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic 
code specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality 
requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

The Applicant should address any issues with these funding restrictions in this Section of the 
Business (Cost) Application. 

 

11. Conflict of Interest: 

 

The Applicant should disclose any conflicts of interest pursuant to the following pre-award 
term: 

 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or 
an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 
ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing 
for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but 
are not limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access 
to non-public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant 
or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 


12) Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain 
Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or Equipment 
(November 2020) 

FOR U.S. ORGANIZATIONS 

Special Award Requirement Relating to the Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and 
Video Surveillance Services or Equipment (July 2022) 

USAID has been granted a temporary waiver under Section 889(d)(2) that will allow the 
recipient to use award funds through September 30, 2022, to procure certain 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR 
200.216. Based on this waiver, all costs incurred for covered telecommunications and video 
surveillance services or equipment will be allowable through September 30, 2022, without 
regard to the cost principle at 2 CFR 200.471. Procurements made on or after October 1, 2022, 
will be unallowable in accordance with 2 CFR 200.471. 

FOR NON-U.S. ORGANIZATIONS 

Prohibition on Certain Telecommunication and Video Surveillance Services or 
Equipment (July 2022) 

 a. In accordance with the cost principles in 2 CFR § 200.471, obligating or expending costs 
for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment or services as 
described in 2 CFR § 200.216 are unallowable. Recipients and subrecipients are prohibited 
from using award funds, including direct and indirect costs, cost share and program income, 
for such covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment. This 
provision 07/01/2022 Partial Revision 42 Text highlighted in yellow indicates that the material 
is new or substantively revised. implements temporary waivers granted to USAID under 
Section 889(d)(2) that allow the recipient to use award funds for: 

(1) All costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment 
incurred through September 30, 2022; and 

(2) Costs for covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment 
incurred on or after October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2028, only if the recipient has 
determined that there is no available alternate eligible source for the covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment. 

 

b. After September 30, 2028, in accordance with 2 CFR § 200.471 costs of all covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR § 
200.216 will be unallowable. 

c. The Recipient must include this provision in all subawards and contracts issued under this 
award. 

[END OF PROVISION] 

[END OF SECTION D] 


 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 Criteria 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters 
which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which 
all applications will be evaluated. 

 

The Technical Application will be scored by a Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria 
described in this section. 

 

E.2 Review and Selection Process 

 

The required format and content for the application are described in Section D. The applications 
will be evaluated using an adjectival rating system, in accordance with the selection criteria set 
forth below. USAID will collaborate with the apparently successful applicant(s) to create a final 
Program Description that will be included in the award. Prior to negotiating an actual award, 
the Agreement Officer will review the apparently successful applicant(s) budget to ensure that 
costs, including cost sharing, are in compliance with OMB’s and USAID’s policies. The costs 
proposed must be determined to be reasonable, based on the Cost Application and other 
information, before award can be made. Award will be made to the responsible applicant whose 
application is determined to be the best, based on the criteria specified in this NOFO. The 
Agreement Officer must also evaluate the risk of the apparently successful applicant(s) and is 
charged with the final determination of whether to make an award to the apparently successful 
applicant(s). Among other issues, the apparently successful applicant(s) history of performance 
will be reviewed using the reference information contained in the Technical Application, along 
with any other information deemed relevant by the Agreement Officer or Selection Committee. 
The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally obligate the U.S. Government 
to the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be 
incurred before receipt of either an Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer or a specific, 
written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the 
instructions in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the 
following criteria shown in descending order of importance: 

 

 

1. MERIT REVIEW CRITERION 

 

The evaluation of applications will be completed using the following merit review criterion: 

 


CRITERION 

 CRITERION NAME 

Importance 

Criterion 1 

Technical Approach 

Most important 

Criterion 2 

Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

2nd most important 

Criterion 3 

Personnel and Management Approach 

3rd most important 

Criterion 4 

Institutional capacity, Past Performance, and 
experience 

4th most important 



 

 

Evaluation Criterion No. 1, Technical Approach 

 

● The extent to which the technical application provides a clear overall vision and 
operational strategy to achieve the 


expected results of the activity. The degree to which the application demonstrates a thorough 
analysis of the important 

challenges and priority needs, and key activities. The degree to which the application presents 
a comprehensive technical approach to achieve the activity’s intermediate results and ensures 
that interventions are sustainable. The extent to which the application demonstrates a clear 
effort to build on past achievements and on-going USAID investments. 

 

 

 

● The extent to which the application demonstrates the applicant’s ability to efficiently 
and effectively mobilize and engage the GoDj and other stakeholders in a consultative 
and participatory process. 
● The degree to which the application demonstrates innovative approaches to create 
incentives for program success. 


 

● The degree to which the application clearly describes a feasible and measurable 
approach towards partnership and collaboration that engages multi-sectoral partners 
and communities in genuine participation in all stages of design and delivery. 


 

● The extent to which the application describes how the project will achieve and measure 
sustainable improvements. 


 

Evaluation Criterion No. 2, Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation (LME) Plan 

 

● The extent to which the application demonstrates a thorough and comprehensive LME 
Plan that directly relates to the technical assistance and support to be provided. 
● The extent to which the application includes a practical and appropriate set of 
benchmarks to be achieved against a set of qualitative and quantitative indicators. 
● The extent to which indicators are appropriately disaggregated by gender. 
● The extent to which the application includes well thought out and well-designed 
knowledge of data management systems when discussing the tracking of information. 


 

 


Evaluation Criterion No. 3, Personnel and Management Approach 

 

● The extent to which the application clearly describes the overview of the proposed key 
personnel, their qualifications and experience, and relevant curriculum vitae and 
references, and the extent to which the application presents an efficient and effective 
management approach, , including organization of staff and sub-partners, to achieve the 
goals and objectives of the NOFO. 
● The extent to which the application clearly describes how the applicant will effectively 
and efficiently manage staff, including sub-partners to achieve the goals and objectives 
of the NOFO.. 
● The degree to which the proposed management plan adequately describes how it will 
relate with the YE objectives. 
● The proposed Chief of Party has relevant knowledge and experience in managing an 
activity similar to the YE Activity, in similar contexts. 
● Other key personnel have relevant knowledge and experience in designing, 
implementing and evaluating activities similar to the YE activity, in similar contexts. 
● The extent to which the overall staffing plan demonstrates an appropriate skills mix 
responding to the technical needs of the YE Activity. 


 

 

Evaluation Criterion No. 4, Institutional Capacity and Experience 

 

● The extent to which the application demonstrates evidence of institutional capacity to 
successfully execute an activity similar to YE. 
● The extent to which the application demonstrates the existing organizational capacity 
of the applicant and its major sub-recipients (if any) as demonstrated by its actual 
experience in providing similar programs and activities. 


 

b. Business (Cost) Review 

 

USAID will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth 
in 2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for 
U.S. entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 


financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending 
on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the 
award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

c. Pre-Award: Co-creation/Revised Full Application Submission (ONLY applies to the 
Apparently Successful Applicant(s) selected). 

 

Revised full Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted as instructed by the 
Agreement Officer. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1. Federal Award Notices 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While 
USAID/Djibouti anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential 
applicants are hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

The Cooperative Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document, 
which shall be transmitted to the Recipient for countersignature to the authorized agent of the 
successful organization(s) electronically, to be followed by original copies for execution. 

 

Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful applicants pursuant to ADS 
303.3.7.1.b. USAID will consider requests for additional information pursuant to ADS 
303.3.7.2. 

 

F.2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions 
for U.S. Non-governmental organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental 
Organizations. 

 

See Annex 2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards 
resulting from this NOFO. 

 

F.3. Reporting Requirements 

a. Financial Reporting 


 

Recipients of USAID funding must submit the Federal Financial Form (FFR) (SF-425) on a 
quarterly basis via electronic format to the AOR and USAID ’s Financial Management Office. 
Details on requirements for submission of the financial reports will be included in the award 
document. 

 

 

 


b. Activity Planning 


 

Activity planning reports cover the reports that are critical to USAID/Djibouti’s ability to be 
substantially involved in this Activity. These include annual work plans and a learning, 
monitoring, and evaluation plan. 

 I. Work Plans 

The work plan is intended to express the Recipient and USAID/Djibouti’s plan to implement 
the Activity. The work plan authorizes specific activities to implement the Activity 
Description. The Recipient shall submit to the USAID Agreement Officer Representative 
(AOR) one electronic copy of a draft work plan within 30 days of the completion of the 3-
month inception period after the date of the signing of the agreement, covering the entire four-
year period of performance. The work plan, complemented by budget narratives, should 
explain the rationale, sequence and timeline of activities that will be implemented during that 
fiscal year and provide additional information determined to be relevant by the AOR. USAID 
will review the draft life-of-activity work plan and provide comments/suggestions. The 
Recipient shall then submit one electronic copy of the final life-of-activity work plan to the 
USAID AOR for approval not later than 15 days from receipt of USAID’s 
comments/suggestions. 

The Recipient shall also submit one copy of the final approved life-of-activity work plan to the 
Agreement Officer. The Recipient shall submit one electronic copy of subsequent draft 
revisions and updates to the life-of-activity work plan to the AOR annually. The Recipient shall 
report any significant work plan changes or revisions to the AOR and shall obtain the AOR’s 
approval prior to implementing or undertaking such changes or revisions. Work plans and 
changes/revisions thereto must be within the scope of the Activity Description of this Associate 
Award. Work plans and changes thereto shall describe activities to be conducted during the 
period at a greater level of detail than the Activity Description but shall not serve to change the 
Program Description in any way. 

Work plans should not be submitted to USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse 
(DEC). Details on the Work Plan will be provided in the award document. 

 II. Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA)/ Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning (MEL) Plan 

 

USAID has integrated Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) into all aspects of its 
operations and programming to achieve better development outcomes. See Section A.4.2 of 
this NOFO for additional details on the CLA/MEL Plan. 

c. Performance Reporting 


 

Performance monitoring reporting, to be outlined in the CLA/MEL Plan, is intended to ensure 
that USAID has sufficient information to effectively monitor the Activity’s performance. This 
includes any information regarding any development that may have a significant impact on 
performance, including, but not limited to challenges encountered, and relevant context and 
information on costs incurred compared to the approved budget plan for the Agreement. The 


Activity’s Performance Monitoring Reporting differs from Financial Reporting as the latter is 
intended to address cash flow needs and not performance. 

 I. Bi-weekly and Quarterly Progress Check-in/Presentations 

The bi-weekly progress meetings, unless otherwise mutually agreed, can be face to face or 
telephonic conversations. The quarterly Progress Check-in Presentation however shall be 
formatted as a slide deck, not exceeding 10 slides (excluding annexes). The Implementing 
Partner will provide a short 30-minute presentation quarterly to the USAID activity 
management team and it shall be used as an adaptive management tool. The IP and AOR will 
agree to the logistics of each Check-in Presentation in advance. 

The slide deck will include the following information, highlighting performance during the 
quarter in each fiscal year: 

1. A summary of activities and key results and achievements. Actual achievements of 
the quarter, that should be presented in quantitative terms whenever possible and 
described in relation to results established in the work plan. 
2. Information on management issues, including administrative, or coordination 
problems. 
3. A comparison of actual accomplishments established for the period. 
4. Reasons why planned activities did not take place (if applicable); 
5. Information on major challenges and constraints faced and steps taken to resolve them 
during the performance period being reported. 
6. Other pertinent information as specified by the AOR in writing. 
7. Plans, prospects and intended outputs for the following quarterly period. 
8. Annexes: cumulative list of reports/studies/documents sent to USAID’s Development 
Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) and datasets submitted to the Development Data 
Library (DDL); Other annexes as applicable. 


The detailed format of the presentation will be developed in collaboration with the AOR. The 
Recipient shall discuss with the AOR any issues identified as a result of these presentations, 
including, but not limited to, data quality and cost issues, to determine appropriate follow-up 
actions, including providing additional information as necessary to clarify performance issues. 
The Quarterly Progress Check-in Presentation will not be submitted to USAID’s Development 
Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 

II. Quarterly Learning Briefs 

Quarterly Learning Briefs shall outline key learnings from the quarter’s activities and include 
learnings associated with the activity’s collaboration with the Government of Djibouti( Govdj) 
partners, ongoing monitoring findings, and process-oriented adaptive management learnings. 
Planned and ongoing learning efforts should also be documented and reported in the briefs. 

The brief shall not exceed 6 pages in total or can be included in the quarterly check-in 
presentation, but clearly delineated as the learning brief and will be used as a discussion tool 
during the quarterly check-ins. The exact format of the brief will be developed in collaboration 
with the AOR. USAID will facilitate sharing of lessons learned between IPs, so any 


confidentiality or proprietary information concerns should be noted as and when appropriate. 
Efforts to identify, share, and adapt based on learnings should also be an integral part of the 
S4ME CLA/MEL Plan. The Quarterly Learning Briefs should be submitted to USAID’s 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 

II. Quarterly Expenditure Reports 

The Recipient will submit a brief separate quarterly Expenditure Report to USAID within 30 
calendar days after the end of each quarter of the fiscal year during the performance period. 
The Expenditure Report, Progress Check-in Presentations, and Learning Briefs shall be 
submitted together. 

 III. Annual Performance Reports 

The Recipient will submit annual reports to USAID within 30 calendar days after the end of 
the reporting period. In this regard, the USAID’s annual reporting time covers the period from 
October 01 to September 30. The Annual Report shall contain the following information: 

1. A summary of key achievements. 
2. A comparison of actual accomplishments against goals established for the period in 
the annual work-plan. 
3. Explanations of any issues related to data quality. 
4. A summary of funds expended during the fiscal year by funding source. 
5. A cumulative list of reports/studies/documents sent to USAID’s DEC and datasets 
submitted to the DDL. 
6. A summary of lessons learned and summative answers to the project’s Learning 
Questions. 
7. Information on major challenges and constraints faced during the performance period 
being reported; and 
8. Prospects for next year’s performance. 


Upon receiving AOR approval, the approved Annual Report shall be submitted to the USAID’s 
DEC. Details on the requirements for the Annual Progress Reports will be provided in the 
award document. 

 IV. Close out Report 

 

As part of the close out procedures, the recipient will be required to submit a demobilization 
plan to the AOR’s approval 120 days prior to the completion date of the award. 

The demobilization plan shall include a) draft property disposition plan, b) plan for the phase-
out of operations, c) delivery schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the 
agreement, and d) timetable for completing all required actions in the demobilization plan, 
including the submission date of the final property disposition plan to the Agreement Officer. 

 V. Final Performance Report 

This Final Report will include the following information: 


1. Overall activity accomplishments, presented in quantitative terms and described in a 
narrative that relates activities, products, and results to the Work Plan. 
2. Discussion of why unexpected progress, positive or negative, was made toward the 
planned results. If expected activities were not achieved, the partner shall seek to 
determine and explain the reason. 
3. Analysis of lessons learned, adaptation over the life of the project and summative 
answers to the project’s Learning Questions. 
4. Summary of responses to problems encountered during implementation. 
5. A bibliography of all products, tools, reports, and studies produced through the 
activity; and 
6. Other pertinent information communicated by the AOR in writing within 15 days of 
the end of the agreement. 


The Final Performance Report will cover the entire period of the award. The Recipient shall 
submit a draft of the final report to the AOR within 90 days following the estimated completion 
date of the cooperative agreement. The Recipient shall submit one electronic copy of the final 
Performance Report to USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). The 
Recipient shall submit to the AO and the AOR and to one of the following: 

● Via E-mail: DocSubmit@usaid.gov; 
● Via Fax: (202) 216-3515; or 
● Online: http://dec.usaid.gov 


 

g. Close out Plan 

 

The Recipient will be requested to provide a closeout plan for all activities (administration, 
information, finance, procurement and management) for review and approval, no less than 
180 days before the end date of the Cooperative Agreement. 

 

h. Submission to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications 

 

Per ADS 540.3.2.3, documents and development assistance activity descriptions produced or 
funded with USAID resources and created in support of Intellectual Work must be submitted 
for inclusion in the DEC. The recipient must provide the AOR one copy of any Intellectual 
Work that is published, and a list of any Intellectual Work that is not published. 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit Intellectual Work, whether published or not, to the DEC, 
either on-line (preferred) or by mail. The recipient must review the DEC Web site for 
submission instructions, including document formatting and the types of documents to submit. 
Submission instructions can be found at: http://dec.usaid.gov. For purposes of submissions to 
the DEC, Intellectual Work includes all works that document the implementation, evaluation, 
and results of international development assistance activities developed or acquired under this 
award, which may include program and communications materials, evaluations and 
assessments, information products, research and technical reports, progress and performance 
reports required under this award (excluding administrative financial information), and other 
reports, articles and papers prepared by the recipient under the award, whether published or not. 


The term does not include the recipient’s information that is incidental to award administration, 
such as financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management information. 

 

Each document submitted should contain essential bibliographic information, such as 1) 
descriptive title; 2) author(s) name; 3) award number; 4) sponsoring USAID office; 5) 
development objective; and 6) date of publication. 

 

The recipient must not submit to the DEC any financially sensitive information or personally 
identifiable information, such as social security numbers, home addresses and dates of birth. 
Such information must be removed prior to submission. The Recipient must not submit 
classified documents to the DEC. 

 

In the event award funds are used to underwrite the cost of publishing, in lieu of the publisher 
assuming this cost as is the normal practice, any profits or royalties up to the amount of such 
cost must be credited to the award unless the schedule of the award has identified the profits or 
royalties as program income. 

 

F.4. Program Income 

 

If it is expected that program income might be generated under this program, then program 
income earned under the resulting award shall be added to the program and used to further 
eligible program objectives as agreed upon by USAID. Applicants should describe how 
program income might be generated under the proposed activities and how it envisions program 
income being utilized to successfully accomplish program objectives. Program Income, if any, 
will be accounted for in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. organizations or the Standard 
Provision entitled Program Income for non-U.S. organizations. 

 

F.5. Environmental Compliance 

 

In accordance with USAID policies and procedures related to environmental compliance ADS- 
Chapter 204, the Sustained Improvement in Essential Service Delivery Outcomes Focused on 
Women and Girls DO developed an Initial Environmental Examination and analyzed the 
potential environmental risks of the Surveillance for Malaria Elimination Activity. The Bureau 
Environmental Officer gave a Categorical Exclusion determination for this activity. 
Accordingly, no further environmental assessment is required for the S4ME activity. The IEE 
for this activity will be shared with the apparently successful applicant at a later stage. 

 

a. General 

 

1. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the 
impact of USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID 
include environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and 
carrying out its development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal 
Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 


 Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 


(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/), which, in part, require that the potential 
environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for 
all activities. The Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this Request 
for Applications. 

2. In addition, the contractor/recipient must comply with host country environmental 
regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict 
between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 
3. No activity funded under this Grant will be implemented unless an environmental 
threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial 
Environmental Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed 
by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are 
described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 


 

b. Implementation Plans 

 

1. As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the AOR and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau 
Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned 
activities under this grant to determine if they are within the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 
2. If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the 
documentation for USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be 
undertaken prior to receiving written USAID approval of environmental 
documentation amendments. 
3. Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the 
documentation is submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 


 

F.6. Other Requirements 

 

Success Stories/Events During the performance of this activity for each project component, 
some special reporting may be required from the Recipient such as a brief paragraph on note-
worthy activities and events, successes stories etc. The success stories/events should be 
written to reach a broad audience, both inside and outside of USAID/, and should be provided 
in English, unless USAID requests French versions. Mandatory photo captions and credit 
should be included with the success stories/events. Outreach and communication will be a 
key component and delivered and executed under this project. 

 

 [END OF SECTION F] 

 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

G.1. Points of contact (POC): 

 

See Section D.1 for Points of Contact (POC) for questions while this NOFO is open. 

 

G.2. The Agreement Officer Representative (AOR): 

 

The AOR for this Award is [TBD] and will be designated after the Award. 

 

G.3. Different contacts for distinct kinds of help, 

 

For technical assistance related to Grants.gov, applicants may contact Helpdesk at 1-800-518-
4726 or via email at support@grants.gov 

 

 

 [END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with 
the following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – 
in whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an 
award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 

Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided 
in the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. 
The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title 
page of this application.” 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


List of Annexes 

The following documents are included as Annexes to the NOFO to provide additional 
information to the prospective applicants. 

 Annex 1 _ Summary Budget Template 

 

Annex 2 _ Standard Provisions 

 

Annex 3 – Past Performance Information to be completed by the Applicant 

 

Annex 4 _ Insert a list of any abbreviations and acronyms used in the 

 application 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 – BUDGET FORMATS 

 

SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Total Estimated Amount (TEA) 

S4ME Core Budget Categories 

 Year 1 

 Year 2 

 Year 3 

 Year 4 

 Total All 
Years 

1. Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

a. International Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Local In-Country Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Fringe Benefits and Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Total 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

a. International travel 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Local and domestic travel 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 




a. Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Equipment and 
Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

5. Contractual (Program Implementation) 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Direct Program activities 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Training 

 

 

 

 

 

c. MEL costs 

 

 

 

 

 

d. Consultants 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Subgrants 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Contractual/Program 
Implementation 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Equipment operation costs 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Insurance/Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

c. Office operation costs 

 

 

 

 

 

d. Communication costs 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Other 

 

 

 

 

 




Total Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Indirect Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Material Handling 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Overhead 

 

 

 

 

 

c. G&A 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTALS (Direct and indirect costs) 

 

 

 

 

Approximat 
$16 Million 



 

 

 


 DETAL BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Please include all detailed costs under the following cost categories and subcategories. 

 

 

S4ME Core Budget Categories 

 Year 
1 

 Year 2 

 Year 3 

 Year 4 

 Total All 
Years 

1. 

 

Personnel 

a. International Staff 

i. Expatriate Staff 
ii. HQ Technical Staff 


b. Local In-Country Staff 

i. Program Staff 
ii. 
OperationalStaff 

 

 

 

 

 

2. 

 

Fringe Benefits and Allowances 

a. Fringe Benefits 
b. Allowances 


 

 

 

 

 

3. 

 Travel 

a. International travel 
b. Local and domestic travel (car rental, 
taxis etc.) 


 

 

 

 

 

 




4. 

Equipment and Supplies 

a. Equipment (equipment with a unit 
cost greater than $5,000) 
b. Supplies (equipment with a unit 
cost less than $5,000, including but 
not limited to workstations & 
chairs, file cabinets, computers, 
cellular phones, printers, etc.). This 
cost category does not include 
office supplies, which should be 
included under Miscellaneous 
Direct Costs. 


 

 

 

 

 

5. 

Contractual 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

Direct Program activities (including fixed-
price, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b 

Training 

 

 

 

 

 

c 

MEL costs 

 

 

 

 

 

d. 

Consultants (including but not 
limited to expatriate consultants, 
local consultants, studies, analyses, 
etc.) 

 

 

 

 

 

e. 

Subgrants 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. 

 Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 




a. 

Equipment operation costs (e.g. including, but 
not limited to, vehicle rental/lease, vehicle 
and equipment maintenance/fuel/repair, 
motorcycle fuel/maintenance, generator 
fuel/maintenance, software licenses) 

 

 

 

 

 

b. 

Insurance/Travel (e.g. DBA, Medevac, visas, 
permits, immunizations, exams, vehicle 
insurance, equipment insurance, other 
insurance) 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

Office operation costs (e.g. 

rent/utilities/repairs/maintenance, security 
services, office supplies, make ready costs) 

 

 

 

 

 

d. 

Communication costs (e.g. general 
communications expense, mobile/cellular 
communication, internet, 
printing/photocopying, courier) 

 

 

 

 

 

e. 

Other (e.g. professional fees – 
audit/legal/payroll, branding & marking, 
banking fees) 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Indirect Charges 

a. Material Handling 
b. Overhead 
c. G&A 


 

 

 

 

 

TOTALS (Direct and indirect costs) 

 

 

 

 

Approximately $16 
Million 



 


 

ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that 
is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 

(DECEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 

(Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS - DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020 

X 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 

SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 

(APRIL 1998) 

 

X 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

X 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 

TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

X 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

 

 X 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 




X 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 

CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 

(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 

LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 

TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 

 X 

 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 

USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 

(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

X 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 

FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 

PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 

PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 

MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 

(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

X 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

X 

RAA26 . ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 

SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

X 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 

RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 

AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

X 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 

2017) 




 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

ANNEX 3. REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS 
FOR NON-U.S. NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 
Required 

 Not 

Required 

 Standard Provision 

TBD 

 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 

AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) 

(JUNE 2012) 

TBD 

 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS - DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020 

X 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 

MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 

(NOVEMBER 2020) 

X 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 

(DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

X 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 




X 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

X 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 

 

 

CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

X 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN USAID 

ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 X 

 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS 

(JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 

PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 

PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

X 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 

SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

X 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 

(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

X 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 

LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 

TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

X 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES (JULY 

2014) 

X 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 

RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

X 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 

INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

X 

RAA30. RESERVED 

X 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 [END OF PROVISION] 

 


 

ANNEX 3: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (PPI) 

to be completed by the applicant 

 

 

1. Award Number: 

 

2. Contractor/Recipient (Name and Address): 

 

 3. Type of Award: 

 

4. Complexity of Work/Program: Difficult Routine 

 

5. Description, location, and relevancy of work: 

 

 6. Dollar Value of Work/Program status: Active ___ Completed 

 

7. Date of Award:______ Award Completion Date (including extensions): _____ 

 

8. Type and Extent of Subawards: 

 

9. Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address of the 
Contracting/Agreement Officer and/or the Contract/Agreement Officer ’s 
Representative: 



 

 


 

 

 

ANNEX 4 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

Insert a list of any abbreviations and acronyms used in the application. 

 

 

 

END OF NOFO: 72060322RFA00002 

 

 

 

 

 


