 

 

Issuance date: May 31, 2022 

Questions Deadline: June 15, 2022 – 17:00 hrs. Ethiopia Time 

Closing date: July 27, 2022 – 17:00 hrs. Ethiopia Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72066322RFA00004 

 

Program Title: Public Health Emergency Management (PHEM) Activity 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development’s (USAID) Mission in Ethiopia 
(USAID/Ethiopia) is seeking applications for a cooperative agreement from qualified entities 
to implement the Public Health Emergency Management (PHEM) Activity, subject to the 
availability of funds. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

 

USAID/Ethiopia intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of 
this funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to 
a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to 
read this NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted 
on www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly 
check the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 

 

USAID/Ethiopia bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or 
conversion processes. If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the 
NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at 
support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

IMPORTANT NOTE: USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has 
complied with all applicable Unique Entity Identifiers (UEI) and System for Award 
Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.6.7. The registration process may 
be significantly delayed due to recent changes so applicants are encouraged to begin 
registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the points of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received by the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 


 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are 
submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s 
expense. 

 

Final award of a Cooperative Agreement cannot be made until funds have been fully 
appropriated, allocated, and committed through internal USAID procedures. While it is 
anticipated that these procedures will be successfully completed, the applicant is hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for award. The application is being submitted at 
the risk of the applicant; should circumstances prevent the award of a cooperative agreement, 
all preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID/Ethiopia programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

Admir Serifovic 

Supervisory Agreement Officer 

USAID/Ethiopia


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................... 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ................................................................. 45 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ........................................................................... 49 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ..................................... 52 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION ........................................................ 74 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION.............................. 78 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS ............................................... 86 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION ..................................................................................... 87 
ANNEX 1 – BUDGET FORMATS ............................................................................................. 88 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS .................................................................................... 94 
ANNEX 3: ACRONYMS ............................................................................................................. 97 


 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

1. PURPOSE 


The Public Health Emergency Management (PHEM) activity aims to reduce morbidity and 
mortality of Ethiopian citizens related to public health emergencies while ensuring 
continuity of essential health services (including MNCH) by strengthening the full cycle of 
public health emergency management: preparedness, response and recovery. 

 

The PHEM activity will strengthen individual, community and institutional capacity and resilience 
to more effectively respond to public health emergencies, specifically to better prevent, prepare, 
detect and respond to outbreaks or emergencies, and ensure the delivery of essential health services 
continues. It will improve local leadership and management, coordination1, surveillance capacity2, 
planning for identified risk, and outbreak investigation for PHEM. Conscious and deliberate 
attention to the specific needs and concerns of women and girls during emergencies and outbreaks 
will be fundamental to all efforts. 

1 Including between EPHA (RPHA) and the Emergency Directorates within MOH and the RHBs. 

2 The PHEM activity is expected to coordinate with and leverage ongoing CDC, BRE-TA and GHSA support to 
disease and outbreak surveillance, investigation and management. 

3 Tool to measure capacity and commitment to be developed jointly by apparently successful offeror, USAID and 
other stakeholders. At a minimum to ensure results, selection woredas/communities should have HCWs and 
leadership with the right educational criteria, skills, expertise, understanding of PHEM, good planning, 
communication, understanding of the system, basic understanding of data and use for programming. Identified 
woredas should have internet connectivity, basic computer hardware, etc. 

4 The latest data on vulnerability and risk will be used for hot spot woreda categorization (NDRMC-ENCU) 

https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1FPld7hzsUfJM4dwXkqgYA-iEkcwy6qS1 

 

 

The activity will strive to deliver catalytic interventions that reduce the impact of shocks and 
outbreaks on Ethiopian citizens’ health and livelihoods and support continuity of basic service 
delivery during a crisis. The activity will consider geographies with strong health sector 
foundational capacity and commitment3 that are categorized as hotspot Woredas prone to frequent 
or recurrent outbreaks and/or emergencies4. 

 

 

 

 


2. BACKGROUND 


 

2.1. Country context 

 

A. Problem Statement 

 

Ethiopia has significantly improved economic, health, education, and other social services in 
recent years, but progress is constrained by recurrent emergencies5 and weak public health 
emergency management (PHEM). PHEM is the process of anticipating, preventing, preparing for, 
detecting, responding to, controlling, and recovering from the consequences of public health 
emergencies to minimize health and economic impacts6. It covers the entire cycle of an emergency 
or disaster, from prevention and preparedness to response and recovery. Ethiopia is vulnerable to 
health, climate and conflict shocks which are often protracted and have resulted in a complex 
emergency7 with an estimated 23.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance. The 
COVID-19 pandemic further highlighted the importance of investment in PHEM, as has the 
current context wherein conflict and violence have greatly increased displacement, destroyed 
health care infrastructure and assets, and limited access to health care services. Ethiopia lacks 
capacity to quickly detect and effectively respond to outbreaks and disasters, affecting the health 
and livelihoods of thousands of Ethiopians a year 8,9 and impeding routine service delivery and 
shock response. 

5 An emergency can be described as “a type of event or imminent threat that produces or has the potential to produce 
a range of health consequences, and which requires coordinated action, usually urgent and often non-routine”. 
World Health Organization 2018, Primary health Care and Health emergencies https://www.who.int/docs/default-
source/primary-health-care-conference/emergencies.pdf 

6 Ethiopian Health and Nutrition Research- Institute Public Health Emergency Management Centre,2020, Public 
Health Emergency Management Guideline 

7 USAID Complex Emergency Fact Sheet https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/05.18.2021_-
_USG_Ethiopia_Complex_Emergency_Fact_Sheet.pdf 

8 https://data.humdata.org/dataset/ethiopia-humanitarian-needs-overview 

9 https://www.moh.gov.et/ejcc/sites/default/files/2020-
11/Annual_Performance_Report_2012%282019_2020%29.pdf 

10 Ministry of Health-Ethiopia. Annual Performance report (2019/2020),page 83-87. 
https://www.moh.gov.et/ejcc/sites/default/files/2020-11/Annual_Performance_Report_2012%282019_2020%29.pdf 

11 Assessment report on public health emergency management in Ethiopia, February 2020. 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vG63Efb5i13uoMjMCayYIMVgPAlgoxyW/edit 

 

Health reforms, expansion of community health programs, and improved disease prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment are reducing mortality and morbidity. Interventions to improve health 
financing, health commodity security, human resources for health (HRH), and improved data use 
systems and practices are strengthening the health system, albeit unevenly10,11. Service quality is 
improving, yet few facilities meet basic standards, and national progress masks wide geographic 
variation and inequity. Furthermore, inequitable gender norms adversely impact health and health-


seeking behavior with regard to family planning (FP), maternal, newborn, and child health 
(MNCH), water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), and malaria services. 

 

Major public health risks that constrain the Ethiopian health system include recurrent outbreaks of 
cholera, measles, yellow fever and polio, together with outbreaks in livestock and desert locust 
infestations, conflict and climate shocks such as drought associated nutritional emergencies.12 
These shocks impact individuals and households, communities and systems, and when health 
shocks occur amidst malnutrition, food insecurity, conflict or displacement, their impact is 
exacerbated13,14. 

12 Ethiopian Health and Nutrition Research- Institute Public Health Emergency Management Centre,2020, Public Health 
Emergency Management Guideline 

13 The effect of COVID-19 and government response measures on poor and vulnerable groups in urban areas in 
Ethiopia,https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nt8TNTAokrtOOHAyOj0n7OHxe3HwXT0aVTLoZLuwotM/edit 

14 Socio-Economic impact assessment of COVID-19 in Ethiopia, UNDP, Ethiopia 
https://www.et.undp.org/content/ethiopia/en/home/library/un-socio-economic-impact-of-covid-19-in-ethiopia 

15 Assessment on Public Health Emergency Management in Ethiopia: IBTCI: February 2020 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vG63Efb5i13uoMjMCayYIMVgPAlgoxyW/edit 

16 MINISTRY OF HEALTH-ETHIOPIA. February 2021. Health Sector Transformation Plan II /HSTP II / - 2020/21-2024/25 . 
MOH. 

 

Millions of Ethiopians are vulnerable to climate, conflict, and health shocks, with successive 
billion-dollar humanitarian appeals launched year after year. In 2020, UNOCHA estimated health 
cluster financing needs to exceed $100 million ($95 million of which was not related to COVID). 
The number of people in need of humanitarian health response in Ethiopia has varied between 11 
million and 6 million a year from 2018 to 2021. The 2021 HRP estimated 8.8 million people in 
need of health assistance, with 97% of needs estimated to be severe. However, the Government of 
Ethiopia’s systems to manage, respond to, and recover from shocks are still weak, particularly at 
the sub-regional levels. It needs coordination with humanitarian and community-led actors, often 
functioning in emergency responses, to contribute to the effectiveness of emergency response and 
avoid duplication and an uneven distribution of resources. Ambiguities around roles and 
responsibilities also have negative repercussions on the management of emergency nutrition, 
resulting in duplication of effort and inefficient use of limited resources.15 

 

Data from Ethiopia’s Health Sector Transformation Plan II (HTSP II) 2021-202516 shows 84% of 
people affected by Public Health Emergency were rehabilitated, and the proportion of epidemic 
controlled within acceptable mortality rate increased to 80% in 2018. The HTSP II identified major 
shortcomings in Ethiopia’s subnational PHEM system, particularly in conducting effective 
surveillance, operationalizing Emergency Operation Centers (EOCs), rumor management, limited 
use of laboratory surveillance, and constrained resources for emergency response. PHEM falls 


under the mandate of the Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI), a semi-autonomous wing 
within the Ministry of Health (MOH).17 

17 The PHEM office under EPHI is responsible to prevent, forecast, prepare for, detect and respond to public health 
emergencies in collaboration with other sector offices. 

18 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Health. August 2018. Mid-Term Review of Ethiopia’s 
Health Sector Transformation Plan, 2015/16-2019/20, Volume I. 

19 Journal of Multidisciplinary Healthcare,2020:13 ,Challenges and Silver Linings of COVID-19 in Ethiopia –Short 
Review ;Ethiopian Public Health Institute,2020,Intra-Action Review (IAR) on Public Health Preparedness and 
Response to COVID-19 in Ethiopia, 

20 https://insights.careinternational.org.uk/in-practice/gender-equality-in-emergencies 

21 Sexual reproductive health and rights in emergencies https://www.who.int/health-cluster/about/work/other-
collaborations/sexual-reproductive-health-rights/en/ 

22 Assessment report on public health emergency management in Ethiopia, February 2020. 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vG63Efb5i13uoMjMCayYIMVgPAlgoxyW/edit 

23 Reproductive Health for Communities in Crisis, UNFPA EMERGENCY RESPONS 
https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/crisis_eng.pdf 

 

The 2018 Health Sector Transformation Plan (HSTP), mid-term review found that PHEM 
functionality jeopardized development progress, and that the health system struggles to 
simultaneously manage response efforts and sustain routine services.18 The COVID-19 pandemic 
exposed gaps as the PHEM system struggled to respond to a large-scale outbreak. While the full 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the health system is not yet clear, fear of COVID-19 
depressed service seeking behavior, and high-capacity facilities were converted to COVID-
treatment centers, further reducing service access.19 

 

Crises have different impacts on people based on their age, sex and gender, that can influence how 
people prepare for, respond to, recover from crisis. Pre-existing structural gender inequalities are 
exacerbated during emergency crises. GBV, including intimate partner violence, increases during 
emergencies, including pandemics.20 Women and girls are at increased risk of sexual violence and 
unintended pregnancies during emergencies. They face additional barriers to accessing MCH and 
Sexual and Reproductive Health (SRH) care. During an emergency, the rate of maternal death and 
injury in crisis zones is almost double the world average.21 Reproductive health care in 
emergencies has been considered a luxury and neglected technical area, but it is a basic necessity 
that saves women, girls and infant lives and reduces illness.22 Integrating SRH in emergency 
response planning helps to prevent and manage the consequences of sexual violence against 
women and girls, prevent reproductive health-related morbidity and mortality, reduce HIV 
transmission, and plan for comprehensive reproductive health services in the early phase of 
emergency through the primary health care system.23 

 

Effective PHEM requires capacity in all health system building blocks: leadership and governance, 
health workforce, healthcare financing, information management, supplies and commodities, and 


service delivery. Recent PHEM restructuring efforts at national level improved functionality, 
particularly at the national and regional levels.24 Automating data has improved efficiency, and 
surveillance and reporting have improved. WHO and CDC have invested heavily in building up 
Emergency Operations Center (EOC) capacity at the regional level. They provide technical 
assistance to activation and running of EOC during emergencies by embedding teams to the 
national and regional EOCs and provide training to Rapid Response Teams for improved 
functionality of EOCs, potentially providing an opportunity to sustainably strengthen coordination 
capacity in the longer term. The PHEM structure exists at federal and regional levels, but sub-
regional capacity lags and continues to hinder response efforts.25 

24https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WEHLD8Oha9yLVJeyL4awUrFOTEPxklKW/edit?usp=drive_web&ouid=
107823251659773791549&rtpof=true 

25 Assessment report on public health emergency management in Ethiopia, February 2020. Page 4 and Annex II 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vG63Efb5i13uoMjMCayYIMVgPAlgoxyW/edit 

26 Formative Research Summary and Evidence and Knowledge Gaps Analysis. Assessing the efficiency and 
effectiveness of emergency health financing mechanisms in Ethiopia.20th May 2021. BRE-TA Ethiopia 
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1DJ_MoiTnR_yjUKeh31INYyo3oRdZPp2K/edit#slide=id.p1 

 

There are minimal structural arrangements at local levels of government to execute PHEM 
activities. There is no permanent high-level incident management structure specifically for health 
emergencies. Instead, there is a committee that is formed every time a health and nutrition 
emergency is detected. This approach results in delays in response and limits recovery capacity 
since the committee becomes inactive soon after the response activities end. The central PHEM 
team has no formal linkage with health facilities and consequently encounters serious difficulties 
in organizing timely responses. PHEM is housed within the regional health bureaus, with the 
exception of Amhara which replicates the national structure with a regional public health institute 
hosting PHEM. 

 

Critical systems and capacity gaps remain, particularly at the sub-regional level. Budgets 
consumed in emergency response are rarely replenished. The ongoing BRE Operational Research 
on Emergency Health Financing under the DRM-CB activity26 shows there is no domestic 
financing for PHEM system strengthening. The PHEM budget is ad-hoc and in ‘response’ mode. 
Resources during emergencies are mobilized through budget reallocation/reprogramming, 
contributing to the depletion of resources for primary care and affecting the timeliness and quality 
of response. Data collection, analysis and use, communication, human resources, and coordination 
with the MOH are weak. Health commodities and emergency health workers are not deployed in 
a timely manner due to limited preparedness, planning and financing. There is often a lack of 
prioritization or focus, and there is inadequate knowledge to objectively assess the impact of 
outbreaks and shocks. This results in poor management and outbreaks develop into large-scale 
emergencies, contributing to a negative cycle wherein shocks and disease outbreaks weaken basic 
care, increase vulnerabilities and expose the community to other outbreaks or crises, limit the 


health system’s performance, and negatively impact health outcomes. Critical investments are 
needed to strengthen local PHEM systems and capacity at all levels to enhance preparedness, 
reduce humanitarian needs, and prevent erosion of development gains. 

 

Public health emergency management systems and capacity gaps27 

● Poor leadership and governance and limited coordination and leadership capacity. 
● Limited sub-regional capacity to prepare for, detect and effectively respond to shocks. 
● Incomplete, outdated and underutilized woreda risk profiling documents. 
● Limited technical capacity of frontline, regional and national PHEM staff for specific outbreaks. 
● Weak Early Warning and Alert Response Systems (EWARS). 
● Lack of robust surveillance and information management systems at subnational level.28 
● Limited capacity for analysis, interpretation and use of data. 
● Lack of preparedness plans. 
● Lack of clear guidance or protocol for post-outbreak response evaluation/audit. 
● Systemic lack of capacity to incorporate gender considerations in response and recovery efforts. 
● Duplicative and parallel reporting systems 




27 Assessment report on public health emergency management in Ethiopia, February 2020. 
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vG63Efb5i13uoMjMCayYIMVgPAlgoxyW/edit 

28 Surveillance is being integrated into DHIS2, but bottlenecks in data flow – both quality and timeliness – strains 
capacity to adequately prepare, detect and respond to outbreaks. 

29 The major strategic directions towards improving PHEM include strengthening multi-sectoral coordination and 
collaboration, firming regular risk assessment, profiling , communication and early warning system, increasing the 

 

B. PHEM Related Policies 

 

The Health Sector Transformation Plan II (HSTP II) 2020-2024, EPHI’s Strategic Planning and 
Management III (EPHI-SPM-III), and the National Emergency, Injury and Critical Care Strategic 
plan (NEICCS)-2021-2025 are the key policies and strategies that provide direction for Public 
Health Emergencies Management in Ethiopia. USAID’s PHEM activity will coordinate the 
implementation of these policies and strategies. 

 

Health Sector Transformation Plan II /HSTP II/-2020/21-2024/25. Protecting people from 
health emergencies and improving health system responsiveness while progressing towards 
universal health coverage is among the key objectives of the HSTP-II. It aims to improve health 
sector resilience and improve health security by protecting the public from the impact of health 
emergencies caused by man-made and natural disasters, conflicts, recurrent and unexpected 
disease outbreaks and epidemics, accidents, and new health threats. HSTP-II identifies 
improvement of health emergency and disaster risk management and enhancement of the provision 
of equitable and quality comprehensive health services as a center of focus to minimize the 
occurrence and consequences of public health emergencies and disasters.29 HSTP II PHEM targets 


capacity of woredas for emergency preparedness and management, ensuring the availability of adequate and trained 
surge capacity for PHE response i.e. Disaster Medical Assistant Team (DMAT) and Emergency Medical Teams 
including Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) at all levels, and mobilizing the resources required to adequately fund 
emergency preparedness, emergency response operations, and recover. 

30 https://www.ghsindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/2019-Global-Health-Security-Index.pdf 

31 Ministry of Health ,Emergency, Injury & Critical Care System Strategic Plan (2021 – 2025) 

32 EICCS includes pre-hospital care and transportation; initial evaluation, diagnosis and resuscitation; in hospital 
care (emergency units and Intensive care units (ICU)) as well as referral system to deliver time sensitive health care 
services for acute illness and injury across the life course 

for 2024 are (i) increase Health Security Index30 score from 0.63 to 0.78, and (ii), proportion of 
epidemics controlled within the standard of mortality from 80% to 100%. 

 

Strategic Planning and Management (EPHI-SPM-III). The Ethiopian Public Health Institute 
(EPHI) SPM III outlines its mandate to conduct research and technology transfer, conduct public 
health risk surveillance for the early risk identification, detection, prevention and response, and 
alongside these to build the capacity of the Public Health workforces and manage public health 
emergencies. The SPM III emphasizes transforming evidence generation, synthesis, and 
technology innovation for effective decision-making, building a resilient public health emergency 
management, and a sustainable and resilient laboratory system for timely and effective response 
while enhancing proactive governance. 

 

National Emergency, Injury and Critical Care Strategic plan (NEICCS)-2021-2025.31 The 
goal of NEICCS is to decrease emergency injury and critical care (EICC)32 related mortality and 
disability by involving several stakeholders and cascaded the plan to all levels of the health system. 
Strategic objectives include to improve community engagement in EICCS, develop motivated 
EICC proficient workforce, upgrade facility based EICC service towards a standard, enhance acute 
care data quality and management of EICCS, enhance governance and leadership for EICC, 
strengthen partnership and collaboration, improve pre-facility and emergency referral system, 
strengthen surge capacity and disaster management system, improve sustainable EICC financing, 
and improve availability of EICC drugs, supplies and equipment. 

 

C. PHEM Institutional Arrangements: 

 

The National Disaster Risk Management Commission’s (NDRMC) launched a new policy in 2013, 
mainstreaming disaster risk management into the development plans and programs of all sectors 
and to be implemented at all levels. This aspires to establish a comprehensive and coordinated 
DRM system, an early warning and disaster assessment information to guide timely and 
appropriate responses, and decentralized DRM. One of the multi-sectoral bodies that comprises 
the DRM council is the health sector, thus, represented by the PHEM Center at the Ethiopian 
Public Health Institute (EPHI). 

 


EPHI is an autonomous federal government office responsible for PHEM and accountable to the 
Federal Minister of Health. The PHEM center under EPHI is in charge of preparedness, early 
warning, response and recovery for public health emergencies, including outbreaks of diseases, 
malnutrition, natural disasters, industrial or technological accidents, displacement of populations, 
civil unrest, conflicts or acts of terrorism and any other emergency or disaster situations.33 It exists 
at national and regional level, with focal points at the woreda level for surveillance and early 
detection of disease outbreaks. At the national level it has two teams, the Public Health Emergency 
Preparedness and Capacity Building Team, and the Early Warning & Communication Team. 

33 https://ephi.gov.et/public-health-emergency/ 

 

 

A dedicated Emergency and Critical Care directorate (ECCD) at MOH is also working on bridging 
the public health emergency response with the clinical management. It mainly focuses on a range 
of activities from pre-hospital care and transportation, and in hospital care (emergency units and 
intensive care units) to the referral system to deliver time-sensitive health care services. The 
establishment of Disaster Management Assistance Teams (DMAT) in every facility could be better 
leveraged with Public Health Emergency prevention, preparedness, detection and response efforts 
by PHEM and its surveillance and response mechanisms. Hence, USAID’s PHEM activity will 
coordinate with the local PHEM focused institutions to implement its activity. 

 

 2.2. Linkages with USAID’s CDCS and Relationship with Other Actors 

 

The PHEM activity will leverage other USAID programming and the existing and forthcoming 
programs of other development partners in the PHEM space. 

 

USAID/Ethiopia CDCS. The PHEM activity will directly support both Development Objective 
(DO) 1 - Disaster Risk Management Strengthened and DO4 - Sustained Improvement in Essential 
Service Delivery Outcomes focused on Women and Girls of the USAID/Ethiopia 2019-2024 
Country Development Strategy (CDCS). It will directly support Intermediate Result (IR) 1.2 
Institutional risk management capacity strengthened, IR 4.4 Utilization of quality health and 
nutrition services increased, and IR 4.5 Health and nutrition systems strengthened for greater self-
reliance. It will contribute to IR 1.1 Communities empowered to mobilize, mitigate and act on 
shocks and IR 1.3 Emergency response provided more effectively. It primarily contributes to the 
Strengthening Disaster Risk Management Systems and Institutions (SDRM-SI) Project and is 
authorized under the SDRMSI PAD. It will also contribute to the Effective Emergency Response 
(EER) Project, the Empowered Communities for Better Health Project and the Health Systems 
Strengthening Project. It responds to Strategic Principle (SP) 1 Improved citizen empowerment 
and household and community resilience and well-being, and SP 2 More effective and accountable 
systems and institutions at all levels. 


 

USAID. The PHEM activity is expected to collaborate with activities under the SDRMSI project 
and in the USAID/Ethiopia health portfolio, especially in improving woreda capacity to manage 
relevant public health risks. It is particularly expected to collaborate with the Digital Health 
Activity to achieve some of the results intended to be achieved under this project including those 
related to local Early Warning and Alert Response System, capacity development, real-time data 
capture, analysis, and virtual support at all levels. USAID/Ethiopia’s DRM investments include 
Disaster Risk Management Professionalization and Youth Leadership (DRM-PYL) which helps 
to address human capacity constraints and leadership gaps, the National Incident Management 
System (NIMS) program which supports the coordination of national emergency response and 
health response efforts at all levels, the Household Economy Approach Utilization activity (HEA-
U) which supports analytic and information management to improve understanding of the impact 
of shocks, and the Disaster Risk Management-Capacity Building (DRM-CB) which tackles 
capacity constraints at a systems-wide institutional level. The DRM-CB activity includes a Public 
Health Emergency (PHE) workstream designed to strengthen PHEM systems and procedures 
through system design, improving regional and woreda level structures and processes to plan for 
and respond to public health emergencies, and developing robust and reliable financing for public 
health emergencies. The new PHEM activity will build local capabilities to leverage and 
operationalize some of the analytic and policy work conducted by BRE.34 

34 USAID’s Disaster Risk Management Project has a project-level developmental evaluation in place to support 
collaboration, learning and adapting across the DRM portfolio. 

35 In 2019 the government prioritized rabies, anthrax, brucellosis, Rift Valley Fever and highly pathogenic avian 
influenza as their top zoonotic diseases of pandemic potential 

36 https://coregroup.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/WWHGD-GHSA-Poster-2019-1.pdf 

 

GHSA. The USG’s Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) builds on the International Health 
Regulation (IHR) framework to improve countries’ public health and animal health system to 
prevent, detect and respond to emerging infectious diseases of pandemic potential. It follows the 
One Health approach as its main strategy for coordinating efforts of multiple sectors toward 
achieving optimal health for humans, animals and the environment. Zoonoses remain among the 
epidemic prone diseases in Ethiopia that result in significant morbidity and morbidity from time 
to time. The GHSA program has been supporting formation and operationalization of One Health 
structures at national and subnational levels. The CORE Group Polio Project (CGPP), has been 
implementing a community-based surveillance program for vaccine preventable diseases and 
prioritized zoonotic diseases35 since 2019. The program deployed community volunteers to 
routinely collect suspected disease outbreak events in real time including GPS coordinates and get 
the data captured in a central data-base at CGPP. Over the last two years, the surveillance system 
has proven to be effective for early detection of outbreaks as in the case of the recent unknown 
camel disease outbreak in Somali region 36. Potential offerors will need to build on best 
practices/lessons learned from this historical USG investments to support any activities around 


community-based surveillance. Additionally, with USG funding, a playbook for the emergency 
supply chain system was developed in consultation with EPHI and EPSA. Where applicable 
PHEM will collaborate with GHSA mainly in the areas of strengthening preparedness, 
surveillance, workforce development and risk communications. GHSA also works with risk 
communication (JHU-CCP), laboratory diagnostics (FAO, IDDS) and rational use of antibiotics 
(FAO and MTaPS). FAO and IDDS have also supported after action reviews. 

 

CDC. CDC has been supporting GOE in strengthening PHEM primarily at the national and 
regional level. The support structure includes cooperative agreements with Ethiopian Public 
Health Institute, Federal Ministry of Health, Regional Health Bureaus, NGO and other 
Implementing Partners, enduring capacities for Ethiopia to meet International Health Regulations 
requirements as part of its mandate under the USG Global Health Security Agenda and COVID-
19 response. Some of the activities funded by CDC include the on-going support to federal and 
regional laboratory services by providing training and technical assistance to lab staffs and 
strengthen lab referral network, build capacity on laboratory surveillance; support woredas and 
rapid response teams to investigate and respond to hot spots; strengthen reporting, management 
and use of data, develop national PHEM training program, conduct inter- and after- action reviews 
and use of findings, strengthen IT network between EOCs, integrate and train Rapid Response 
Teams(RRTs) for improved functionality with EOCs, refurbish EOC working spaces; Support the 
Ethiopia Field Epidemiology Training Program(FETP) to strengthens the capacity of public health 
epidemiologists to detect, respond, and control disease outbreaks at the source. The EFETP trains 
woreda surveillance officers, Zonal PHEM officers and National and Regional PHEM officers to 
help Ethiopia build critical global public health capabilities to efficiently and effectively respond 
to ongoing and emerging global health pandemics. EFETP graduates also play a key role in 
preparedness and response efforts by leading the national PHEOC as members of the incident 
management structure. 

 

World Health Organization (WHO). WHO has been one of the lead agencies in providing 
technical assistance to activation and running of EOC and contribute in containment of past and 
current outbreaks / epidemics like Cholera, measles, Polio, Yellow Fever, acute malnutrition and 
COVID-19 at national and subnational level. WHO’s noticeable involvement has been through 
embedding teams that extend technical assistance to the EOC and all the pillars that support its 
operationalization. Overall, WHO leads the Health Emergency Cluster through allocating health 
emergency grants to implementing partners, supports early warning & surveillance, and develops 
a short-term field epidemiological training (FETP). In 2020, the resource WHO allocates for 
emergency response and support EOC activities at national and subnational level was 19.5 million 
including Covid responses (MOH info). 

 

Other donors. Development partners currently operating in Ethiopia in PHEM include the World 
Bank, the UK’s Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) and Public Health 


England (PHE), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Food Program (WFP) and 
other UN Agencies. FCDO and USAID co-finance the Technical Assistance (TA) component of 
Building Resilience in Ethiopia (BRE) program to support GOE manage its recurrent and 
unexpected humanitarian crises, including a PHEM workstream. FCDO’s PHEM workstream 
mainly focuses on improved services provision in PHEM system, establishment of decentralized 
and multisectoral public health emergency management system, effective and timely region- and 
woreda-level preparedness and response, availability of resources for PHEM and continuity of 
essential services. In addition, UNICEF and WFP also provide technical support to GOE in 
emergency and nutrition. 

 

COVID-19. In response to COVID-19, the CDC funded the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and 
Economic Security (CARES) project to strengthen Ethiopia’s emergency management capabilities 
through a partnership with the Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI), regional health bureaus 
and other key partners. The World Bank has also financed the International Development 
Association (IDA), under the COVID-19 Fast Track Facility Multiphase Programmatic Approach 
which aims to fill critical gaps in the health sector within the government’s national response 
efforts. Similarly, The Global Fund has allocated emergency COVID-19 Response funds to 
Ethiopia. 

 

Private sector. Public-private partnerships have the potential to alleviate some of the burden 
placed on the government to provide immediate resources and services before and during 
emergencies, and private sector involvement can help to increase the efficiency and effectiveness 
of response. Some initiatives have been taken by MOH and international and local private 
organizations. Medicines Sans Frontiers (MSF) provides medical aid to a population in crisis and 
has taken initiatives to strengthen the hospital capacity through training of general practitioners in 
emergency surgery and obstetrics. Local private sector actors in the fields of pre-hospital 
ambulance service, hospital emergency and trauma care provide emergency medical services and 
provide training to health personnel. PPPs require further collaboration and alignment in the health 
system and the PHEM activity will contribute to an enabling environment for private sector led 
economic growth, a core development objective under USAID/Ethiopia’s CDCS. 

 

3. RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

 

3.1. Theory of change 

 


IF local leaders have sufficient commitment, capacity and timely data, and 

IF Woredas develop capacity to identify, prepare to and manage shocks ,and 

IF sustainable risk financing system established in PHEM, and 

IF gender issues is mainstreamed into PHEM, 

THEN there will be reduced morbidity and mortality among Ethiopian citizens related to public health 
emergencies and essential health services will continue uninterrupted. 



 

Ethiopia’s public health system is continually challenged by dynamic and complex recurrent and 
unexpected disease outbreaks37 and other natural and man-made shocks38. The country faces the 
challenge of managing the health consequences of emergencies, crises, and conflicts. There is a 
need for a paradigm shift from managing emergencies to managing risks, and maintaining access 
to primary health care services for vulnerable Ethiopian people, with a multi-hazard and 
multisectoral approach that moves beyond the traditional approach to tackling communicable 
diseases. This activity contributes to core capacities in coordination and collaboration during 
emergencies, strengthening surveillance systems, risk communication and early warning systems, 
preparedness and response capability at the woreda level, while leveraging sustainable risk 
financing and incorporating an intentional integration of gender. It focuses on leadership capability 
and local system strengthening, with a fully integrated and adaptable approach to create disaster- 
resilient communities and reduce the impact of disasters on health outcomes and health care 
delivery. 

37 Disease outbreaks include measles, AWD/Cholera, malaria, polio, leishmania, rabies, anthrax, Yellow Fever, 
Meningitis, Dengue, scabies, Rift Valley Fever, Chikungunya Fever and recently COVID-19. 

38 Natural and man-made disasters such as drought, locusts, flood, earthquake, volcanic eruptions, conflicts 
,accidents including traffic accidents, chemical spills, and Bioterrorism etc. 

 


3.2. Activity Logic Model39 

39 https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mIY8cfYsUKJMJ3f3yQHjQldzfGT9kXzS_XDxaiqpTB8/edit 

 

A picture containing Word
Description automatically generated 


3.3 Expected Results 

 

The PHEM activity will support interventions under five interrelated objectives to reduce 
morbidity and mortality among Ethiopian citizens related to public health emergencies and 
continuity of essential health service by improving public health emergency responsiveness to 
effectively end outbreaks and limit the negative health impacts of other shocks. 

 

The PHEM activity will target zones, woredas and health facilities, with an emphasis on building 
capacity at local levels. In summary, the activity seeks to accomplish five interrelated objectives 

1. Local leadership of public health emergencies improved. 
2. Woreda capacity to manage relevant public health risks increased (preparedness, response 
and recovery). 
3. Local Early Warning and Alert Response System (EWARS) and data management capacity 
strengthened. 
4. Local core capacity on gender in emergencies (GiE) developed 
5. Innovation funding for emergencies increased. 


 


3.4. Activity Description 

 

The PHEM activity is targeted at the subnational level and no material support (computers, 
software, vehicles, etc.) will be provided to the GOE. 

 

Objective 1. Leadership of public health emergencies management improved at the local 
level 

 

Building, strengthening, and maintaining local leaders’ core capacities is crucial to overcoming 
the weaknesses that hinder effective emergency response. Developing these capacities, particularly 
management and coordination, should include efforts to strengthen individual, community and 
institutional capacities and to coordinate the mobilization of resources through multisectoral action 
plans in case of public health emergencies. Capable leaders monitor program progress for unusual 
trends and use data to act in the need of an emergency or outbreak, ideally applying a predefined 
action plan. Early identification enables early response, therefore the first step to improving PHEM 
response and management is ensuring appropriate risk action planning that includes both 
mitigation efforts and direct response efforts. It will be necessary to improve local surveillance 
capacity for early identification of emergencies or outbreaks, understand local stakeholders40 
equities in PHEM response and support coordination across stakeholders to improve efficiency in 
emergency response, and undertake simulation exercises41 to identify critical capacity gaps in 
leadership and core capabilities42 and improve real-world response by increasing confidence of 
decision-makers. Local leaders frequently depend on regional and national PHEM for outbreak 
investigation and confirmation. Timely requests for support with timely follow up and feedback 
often determines the impact and scale of the associated emergencies. Improving data use for 
decision-making, coordinating stakeholders, and conducting simulations, will improve local 
PHEM leadership and management among zonal and woreda officials and provide direct benefit 
to vulnerable Ethiopian people. Local public health leaders also need to prevent emergency 
response compromising delivery of essential Primary Health Care (PHC) services, and so 
coordinate with the Regional Health Bureaus (RHBs) to ensure basic services continue. 

40 Stakeholders include but not limited to institutions such as water, agriculture, health facilities, universities, and partners, to 
ensure comprehensive PHE preparedness and responses 

41 WHO Simulation Exercise Manual. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017. License: CC BY-NCSA 3.0 IGO. 

42 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Health. August 2018. Mid-Term Review of Ethiopia’s Health Sector 
Transformation Plan, 2015/16-2019/20, Volume I. 

43 Prevention, preparedness, mitigation, response and recovery. 

 

Illustrative interventions/activities: 

● Train key local PHEM leaders on leadership development and management (LDM) skills 
for the full cycle of DRM.43 There is currently a curriculum called Leading in Emergencies 
developed by Management Sciences for Health that can be adapted/leveraged. 



● Update professional development to reflect needed competency skill sets for effective local 
PHEM leadership, drawing on existing policies/manuals. 
● Provide training and assist local PHEM leaders strategically utilize information collected 
through surveillance systems and take timely evidence-based actions. 
● Technical assistance to establish functional44 multi-sectoral health emergency 
preparedness and response coordination platforms at the local level, that incorporate 
EOCs, multilateral organizations, NGOs/CSOs/community members, other public service 
sectors, political and administrative structures.45 
● Train and conduct emergency drills. Evaluate drills against response plans, and provide 
feedback for leadership and other personnel using existing Emergency Preparedness and 
Response Plan (EPRP). 
● Train and assist local PHEM leaders to manage and lead virtual trainings, engage in a 
virtual mentorship and interactive expert advice for woreda PHEM officers, health center 
heads, and frontline workers/first responders. 
● Provide technical assistance to local PHEM leadership to conduct After Action Reviews 
and incorporate the learnings to inform future preparedness. 
● Develop framework and mechanism for integrating and managing volunteers and the 
private sector into rapid response teams during emergencies. 
● Establish a registry roster of available experts trained in emergency management that 
could be leveraged for surge capacity or PHEM response.46 
● Provide technical assistance to support local PHEM leaders monitor and maintain 
continuity of essential services during public health emergencies based on lessons learned 
from COVID-19. 


44 The definition of functional will be defined post award, but examples include where all sectors, collaborators and partners 
identify their areas of intervention and capacity for PHEM and have TOR and MOU to guide the framework. Members conduct 
an active coordination forum and have M & E mechanism for implementation of PHEM activities; Organize a Rapid Response 
Team (RRT) to initiate activities at the time of response and review membership as needed. 

45 In collaboration with CDC and NIMS. 

46Identifying the pool of Infectious Diseases (ID) specialists can be leveraged by One Health WorkForce - New Generation 
(OHW-NG) activity, implemented by the GHSA program. OHW trains postgraduate students in three universities (AAU, Jima 
and Mekele) on basic Infectious disease management issues from One Health perspectives. 

 

 

Objective 2. Woreda capacity to manage relevant public health risks increased 
(preparedness, response, and recovery) 

 

The ability to identify and rapidly respond to an outbreak or emergency depends on understanding 
the risks that exist in a given geography. This understanding accelerates the ability to identify the 
source of the outbreak and accurate reporting. Also inherent in improving this response is the need 
for community members to better understand risks that exist in their communities and know when 
and how to seek support. Exercises such as developing and updating “profiles” that outline the 


risks relevant to that woreda can serve to inform health workers, decision makers and may also be 
used for risk communication to educate residents of the woreda. When there is an outbreak or 
shock in an area, or in the case of a drill or simulation, completing post-response audits in a 
standardized format will allow for continuous learning to improve outbreak/emergency response. 
Identifying and capitalizing on innovative approaches for risk communication should be a priority 
for this activity. In addition, building the capacity of PHEM officers and health workers on 
managing risk-informed public health emergencies is equally important at woreda level. Increasing 
the knowledge and skill of health workers in providing Basic Emergency Care (BEC) while 
maintaining essential services can leverage the emergency response. Virtual training platforms and 
facilities will be created for relevant health workers, health managers and PHEM officers in 
collaboration with USAID’s DHA project. In addition to these PHEM educational facilities and 
platforms, a virtual mentorship and interactive expert advice and support mechanism is expected 
to be established for those involved in PHEM activities at different levels of the system. This 
virtual capacity building and mentorship initiative can start with a limited and smaller scale in the 
first two years of this activity, with a gradual scale up based on proof of concept. In a selected 
limited number of woredas, the activities may be achieved through both direct onsite support and 
virtual assistance. 

 

Illustrative interventions: 

● Adapt PHEM training materials and monitoring tools to virtual form and provide virtual 
training on PHEM and BEC toolkit for Woreda focals and incident managers (PHEM 
officers, health center heads, and frontline workers/first responders). 
● Provide technical assistance to conduct and leverage vulnerability assessment and risk 
mapping (VRAM) for selected woredas in collaboration with other development partners 
such as BRE-TA47. 
● Provide technical support to woreda health offices and health facilities to develop and 
update Emergency preparedness and response plan (EPRP) for identified risk and hazards. 
● Provide technical assistance and capacity building for the establishment of surge capacity 
and harmonization between the rapid response team (RRT) and Disaster Medical 
Assistance Team (DMAT). 
● Provide technical assistance with an innovative approach to increase local risk 
communication and community engagement (RCCE) initiatives. 
● Conduct post-response audits in woredas that experience a public health emergency. 


47 So far, BRE-TA Public Health Emergency (PHE) workstream has completed the VRAM/EPRP in around 74% of 
the target 100 woredas. 

 

 

 


Objective 3. Local Early Warning and Alert Response System (EWARS) and data 
management capacity strengthened 

 

Surveillance, including a community-based surveillance of reportable diseases, is the bedrock of 
a successful PHEM system. The current system incorporates community-based surveillance but 
lacks critical oversight and management. Local PHEM officers and health workers (HWs) need 
mentoring, technical support, as well as formal training in data management and use. PHEM 
surveillance is being integrated into District Health Information Software 2 (DHIS2), and support 
to local users will improve the efficiency of data automation and the local surveillance system. 
Frontline health workers are communities’ first contact with the health system and can accurately 
identify and properly report on public health risks relevant to their geographic area to generate 
reliable data for woreda, or zonal officials to make timely decisions. 

 

This activity will strengthen the local Early Warning and Alert Response System (EWARS). 
Capacity development, including through virtual facilities for use at all levels, will ensure real-
time data capture and analysis; and support monitoring of disease trends and delivery of 
information that is accurate, timely and complete. This digital health for EWARS initiative will 
start with a limited and smaller scale in the first two years of this activity, with a gradual scale up 
based on proof of concept. Innovations to drive efforts to move from passive surveillance to active 
surveillance should be considered. 

 

The PHEM activity will also leverage the use of the community Health Information System (cHIS) 
and DHIS2, and strengthen the health extension program and woreda and zonal PHEM systems to 
improve data capture, data use, and local decision making towards attaining an effective 
surveillance continuum. It will collaborate with existing digital health activities for the promotion 
and use of their platforms and applications as they apply to PHEM.48 The PHEM activity is 
expected to collaborate with USAID’s DHA, with an emphasis on data system utilization, data 
analysis, data use and business requirements for the systems, focusing on the utilization of IT 
systems in coordination with MOH and its key agencies. The PHEM activity will identify IT gaps 
from the assessment of DHA, and contribute to filling local level gaps to functionalize DHIS2-
PHEM surveillance systems through direct support, or links with other partner resources and 
USAID funded activities. The use of local and social media to disseminate early warning 
information will also be employed. 

48 There are successful digital health platforms and applications in Ethiopia designed to serve various aspects of the 
healthcare system including those related to disease surveillance activities (COVID19 surveillance tools, DHIS2 
aggregate reporting and eCHIS case management tool, IVR reporting tools for Tigray). These initiatives and the use 
of such applications have the potential to demonstrate positive results in disease surveillance, documentation, 
reporting and tracking. 

 

 


Illustrative interventions: 

● In collaboration with DHA, institute a digital health platform to monitor and support real 
time PHEM data management, analysis and use of emergency surveillance data at the local 
level that directly benefits the needy people.49 
● Provide technical assistance and training for PHEM officers on data management, 
including timely analysis and interpretation of data, dissemination of data, and use of the 
real-time data sharing platform developed in collaboration with DHA (see below). 
● Provide technical assistance to local PHEM leadership to support data use for evidence-
based decision making. 
● Train health extension workers (HEWs) and community-based structures50 on data 
recording, reporting and event-based surveillance including rumor collection, tracking 
and investigation systems, in collaboration with DHA. 
● Develop a virtual training platform in collaboration with DHA to support comprehensive, 
interactive and adaptive PHEM and BEC training, and that is usable for mentorship 
support and interactive expert advice at woreda level (see below). 
● Establish a virtual mentorship and interactive expert advisory support mechanism for 
PHEM and PHEM stakeholders. 


49 The digitization of emergency systems is a critical component of public health emergency management that 
directly benefits vulnerable Ethiopian citizens. The development of these systems has already progressed to the 
point wherein scale up at local service delivery points will be the major work. These emergency data are essential 
information for early risk detection and activation of emergency responses which will have a direct impact on the 
needy people. The PHEM activity will not be working through GOE, rather local PHC units and district level 
emergency experts. DHA activities are now entirely citizen-centered. At the federal level, programming collaborates 
and coordinates with GOE for the direct benefit of the Ethiopian people, rather than working through GOE. At the 
local level (sub-national), substantial efforts have been made in the work planning process to distance USAID 
support for federal employees who do not have a direct service relationship with citizens. The PHEM activity will 
mirror this approach. 

50 Community-based structures such as leaders of women development army, influential/religious/clan leaders in 
tracking and reporting rumors because they are the ones who notify HEWs on suspected rumors. 

 

Objective 4. Woreda level core capacity on gender in emergencies (GiE) developed to 
improve tailored services during and after public health emergencies 

 

USAID/Ethiopia’s landscape assessment revealed critical gaps in addressing the specific needs of 
women and girls in emergencies, with no consideration of gender sensitive response or gender 
responsive recovery operations. This was compounded by lack of adequate personnel/expertise to 
train staff on the ground and provide technical support for day-to-day operations as in the case of 
the Gedeo-Guji crisis. This activity will begin to close this gap by developing “gender in 
emergency” capacity/expertise. This can be done through training, and inclusion into various 
scenarios and simulations. Further engagement will be needed at the policy level to address the 
gender gap in the DRM SPIF and at the community level to address gender gaps, but these are 
beyond the scope of this activity. 


 

Illustrative interventions: 

● Provide technical assistance to develop and/or adapt a Gender in Emergencies tool. 
● Train woreda officials, PHEM officers, and Health Workers (HWs) on Gender in 
Emergencies. 
● Ensure MCH, SRH and GBV services are fully integrated into PHEM plans. 
● Develop operational guidelines to meaningfully mainstream gender equality into all 
components of the PHEM, including women’s leadership at the local level. 
● Support rapid gender assessment and implement recommendations to mitigate the 
potential negative effects of the reprogramming of health care funding in the sector, 
especially on women, girls, and persons from marginalized groups. 


 

Objective 5. Innovation Fund for emergencies increased 

 

Local innovations and appropriate technologies have the potential to sustainably address gaps in 
capacity to prevent, detect, or respond to crises. During the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, 
promising local innovations for temperature monitoring, infection prevention and critical care 
were hampered due to lack of resources. This activity can play a role in identifying, funding, and 
supporting catalytic innovations to fill critical gaps in the health risk management landscape. The 
PHEM activity proposes an approach to develop a clearly defined grant protocol advertised on 
national TV and awarded through a rigorous competitive process (“Shark Tank” model). 
Successful recipients could also be eligible for technical support from the award recipient or 
liaising with a third party. 

 

Illustrative Interventions: 

● Develop innovation funding criteria, protocol and application formats in 
collaboration with other donors. 
● Fund game changers for PHEM (i.e., solutions, technology) that can be taken to 
scale, and promote catalyst funding on local media. 


 

4. GENERAL PROGRAM PARAMETERS 

 

4.1. Guiding Principles 

 

Investments made under the PHEM activity will strengthen local capacity for disaster risk 
management and public health emergency service delivery in Ethiopia. The following principles 
are intended to serve as a framework for PHEM’s conceptualization and implementation: self-
reliance, risk driven, progressive, coordinated, flexible, responsive, inclusive, using the existing 
local systems and promoting local solutions, and working collaboratively with other projects to 
achieve results. 


4.2. Geographic Targeting 

 

This PHEM project will primarily work at the sub-national level, i.e., zonal, woreda, and health 
facilities. 

 

The PHEM activity will provide capacity building and technical assistance to local PHEM 
structures. The virtual technical assistance and mentoring will be implemented in phased manner 
through the life of this project. 

 

However, this PHEM activity, in collaboration with local PHEM offices is also expected to provide 
direct technical support and cascade the PHEM activities for selected woredas (at least 10) to create 
centers of excellence. This is intended to help demonstrate the impact of this activity for potential 
future large-scale implementation and application of the modality. 

 

In terms of geographic targeting and selection for the direct capacity development and technical 
assistance at the local levels, the PHEM activity must consider the following factors: 

- Consider a risk matrix with high risk and very high-risk areas based on woreda hotspot 
maps (Annex X). 
- Areas with existing well-established PHEM structures, leadership and other necessary 
infrastructures and overlap with their priority woredas. 
- Population size including but not limited to presence of IDPs, etc. 
- Align with other DRM and/or health activities. For example, woredas can be selected in 
alignment with USAID Transform Health (HDR) Activity, DRM’s National Incident 
Management System (NIMS) program, USAID/DHA Activity. 
- Complementarity with other development partners’ programs in PHEM, avoiding 
duplication of effort and leveraging other investments as appropriate including but not 
limited to WHO and CDC. 
- Fitting with mission-wide investments and available funds. 


 

4.3. Summary of Risk Analysis 

 

USAID/Ethiopia conducted a landscape analysis of PHEM, which broadly identified systemic 
weaknesses in leadership and management, data-driven decision making, coordination among 
stakeholders and various systems, resource gaps or misallocation (financial, human, commodity), 
and an absence of consideration of gender in emergencies. These were most acute at the sub-
national level. This results in poor outbreak management, wherein outbreaks develop into large-
scale emergencies without external support. This contributes to a cycle wherein shocks limit the 


health system’s performance and negatively impact health outcomes. This assessment included 
field travel, and broad stakeholder engagement51. 

51 Assessment report on public health emergency management in Ethiopia, February 2020. 
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1DIdP3UwsfWjcn4cCY-sSKz02uURNWA8U 

 

Gender assessment: The SDRM-SI project was informed by a gender analysis, which broadly 
found there to be a lack of capacity to manage gender issues in emergencies, lack of data associated 
with the specific needs of women and girls’, and that risk identification overlooks women and girls 
in early warning systems, women and girls are often sidelined in participating in community 
exercises to collect, analyze and use early warning data, DRM coordination with the Gender 
Directorate is deprioritized, and NDRMC lacks women in leadership positions. These findings 
drove USAID/Ethiopia to specifically examine gender response in the PHEM landscape 
assessment, which confirmed this information. It should be understood that shocks and disasters 
do not affect all Ethiopians equally. Women are particularly vulnerable, with restrictive gender 
norms and role expectations that limit mobility, access to and control over resources. Pre-existing 
discriminatory practices are exacerbated; domestic and sexual violence against women often 
increases in response to shock-related stress. 

 

Environment assessment/IEE: The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 
requires that the impact of USAID’s activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID 
include environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in 
USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 
(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/), which, in part, requires that the potential environmental 
impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that 
appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 

 

In accordance with 22 CFR and as part of USAID/Ethiopia New Country Development 
Cooperation Strategy (CDCS 2019-2024) formulation, USAID/Ethiopia developed the umbrella 
Initial Environmental Examinations (IEEs) for DO1. That was approved by the Bureau 
Environmental Officer (1/15/2020). According to that IEE, the PHEM activity received a Negative 
Determination with Conditions threshold decision, and appropriate information will be included 
in the solicitation documents including the development of an Environmental Mitigation and 
Monitoring Plan (EMMP) and the submission of regular Environmental Mitigation and 
Monitoring Report (EMMR). This will flow down to sub-agreements and will ensure alignment 
with host country requirements. 

 

Climate Risk: Executive Order 13677 on "Climate-Resilient International Development" requires 
USAID to assess and address climate risk across all its investments. Accordingly, a climate risk 


assessment was conducted for the Disaster Risk Management Strengthened development objective 
(DO1) that covers the PHEM activity. Therefore, as a subset of DRM, PHEM activities share the 
climate risk analysis of a “LOW” climate risk and Activities with “Low” climate risk are not 
required to develop a climate risk management plan. 

 

4.4. Project management approach 

 

The PHEM activity is cross cutting and implemented with other portfolios under DO1 and DO4. 
It is part of the SDRMSI project and is overseen by the DO1 Lead, with advice and guidance from 
the DO4 Lead. 

 

The Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) will sit within USAID/Ethiopia’s Health Office, as 
a member of the Health Systems and Resilience Team. The alternate AOR will be a member of 
the USAID/Ethiopia Disaster Risk Management Team in the Relief and Resilience (R2) Office. 

 

The AOR will be a member of the SDRMSI project team, and reporting for this activity will 
contribute to the SDRMSI Project. The AOR will coordinate with the SDRMSI Project Lead, who 
sits in the Relief and Resilience (R2) Office. The AOR will coordinate emergency responses 
through USAID/Ethiopia’s Strategic Advisory Group for Ethiopia (SAGE). The SDRM-SI Project 
Lead may convene partner meetings to accelerate learning and coordinate among partners who 
contribute to that project. The AOR will ensure coordination with relevant health activities. The 
AOR will work with the Project lead to establish an activity oversight team that is composed of 
experts from various teams for better technical support and monitoring. The AOR will also be 
responsible for ensuring that all health funding requirements are met, such as statutory and 
legislative restrictions regarding abortion. 

 

The activity will require an implementing partner with relevant expertise, infrastructure, and 
operational capacity in multiple regions of Ethiopia, in order to manage and implement the day-
to-day activity. 

 

4.5. Local Ownership, collaboration and Sustainability 

 

USAID/Ethiopia’s PHEM landscape analysis confirmed that national and regional level PHEM 
structures desire support to improve their capacity. Woredas that overlap with other DRM and/or 
health activities, and are consistently rated as hotspot woredas will be prioritized. However, 
woredas that lack either local commitment or capacity will not be considered for this activity to 
ensure USAID investments are best placed for the most effective public health emergency 
response. 

The activity will seek to collaborate with activities operating under the Citizen Responsive 
Governance project, particularly in areas where conflict either drives or exacerbates health needs. 


If the activity works in areas with longstanding humanitarian partners, the activity will work to 
guide the public sector to assert increasing leadership over the process, and ensure coordination 
among all stakeholders. The activity will work directly with local leaders who should demonstrate 
increasingly plan, resource, implement and monitor activities. In order to ensure continuity and 
ownership of the concepts, principles, and outcomes, the implementing partner will engage local 
leadership to jointly plan, monitor, develop a rollout strategy and agree on mechanisms for overall 
implementation and coordination and use data to adjust that strategy as needed. It is possible that 
the activity could apply a phased approach, the applicant should propose a phased approach to 
scale-up these models over the life of this award. Considerations will also be given to other USG 
investments and activities being implemented in areas where such public health disasters and 
emergencies could significantly impact development gains. 

 

5. Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation (LME) and Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting 
(CLA) Considerations 

 

5.1 LME/CLA Plan 

 

USAID has integrated Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) into all aspects of its 
operations and programming to achieve better development outcomes. This involves strategic 
collaboration, systematic and continuous learning, and adaptive management. CLA asks: 

● Do you take the time to think critically about your work? (Learning) 
● Are you strategic in who you collaborate with, what you’re learning? and (Collaborating) 
● Do you use those learnings to change accordingly? (Adapting) 


 

USAID expects the Recipient to have a robust LME/CLA Plan that is fit-for-purpose to enable 
evidence-driven adaptation by both the Recipient and USAID. The LME/CLA Plan will outline 
the approaches and resources for learning opportunities for adaptation, measuring results and 
achievements of activity, collaborating, and adapting. Traditional monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) approaches including indicator monitoring should be complemented with other 
complexity-aware monitoring and learning approaches such as outcome harvesting, most 
significant change, etc. 

 

The Recipient will work closely with their Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) or Activity 
Manager to establish fit-for-purpose learning tasks such as establish indicators, including baseline 
and performance targets. The LME/CLA Plan is due within ninety (90) calendar days from the 
award start date. The Recipient shall submit an updated LME/CLA Plan thirty (30) calendar days 
before the beginning of each subsequent fiscal or agreement calendar year. 

 

Required sections and brief instructions for the LME/CLA Plan include: 


● Learning - Guides performance management planning by setting learning and information 
priorities. It helps in assessing the theory of change, identifies critical learning gaps 
important for successful program implementation; reviews the validity of assumptions; 
monitors the risks. 
○ Key Learning Questions - Explain the strategic learning questions around the ToC 
and learning activities, tools and techniques to answer it and how the learning will 
be utilized. Learning activities are the means by which we generate, analyze, and 
synthesize learning to answer our priority learning questions. There are various 
types of learning activities, including situational analyses, performance and impact 
evaluations, performance monitoring data, context indicators, literature reviews or 
syntheses of existing research, generating and capturing tacit and experiential 
knowledge through facilitated dialogues and other participatory methods (Before 
Action Reviews, After Action Reviews, mid-course reviews, regular reflection 
exercises). Determine if a mix of learning activities could best help you answer 
learning questions. In determining priority learning activities, consider when 
learning is needed (and at what frequency) to inform key decisions. 
○ Monitoring/Indicators - Includes performance indicators; supplemental 
information about each performance indicator including baseline data; targets; 
and Performance Indicator Reference Sheets (PIRS). 
■ Note: geocoded indicator results will be collected where feasible and 
identified in the PIRS. See Section the GIS sub-section below. 



○ Evaluation/Assessments/Studies plan - including purpose and expected use; type; 
estimated budget; planned start and end dates; and expected level of USAID 
involvement. 



● Collaboration - Identify the approach and stakeholders who are most critical to achieving 
the desired development outcomes. In particular an emphasis on local stakeholders is 
desired to build local ownership and capacity. 
● Adapting - Provide details on how learning and collaboration will be used to adaptively 
manage. 
● Enabling Environment - Describe the culture, processes, and resources (including human 
and financial) needed to operationalize the LME Plan. 
● Data Management Plan - Describe appropriate data-management procedures to treat data 
as a strategic asset and to ensure that timely and high-quality monitoring, evaluation, 
research, and other data generated or acquired and are ready for analyses; accessible and 
usable for learning and adaptation (both now and in the future); sharable for 
accountability and transparency; and that the sharing and use of data come with strong 
privacy and security protections. Include also procedures for delivering USAID-funded 
data and information to USAID per award guidelines and Agency policies. The Data 
Management Plan may be developed and approved as a section of the Activity LME Plan 
or as a separate plan. Reference: ADS 579, USAID Development Data. 



 

The Recipient is expected to coordinate and work with the DRM Development Evaluation and the 
Mission’s CLA Platform to share learning and coordinate learning, monitoring and evaluation 
processes including data collection. 

 

As part of the overall LME framework, the implementing partner will conduct a comprehensive 
baseline survey to establish baseline values for the indicators and set targets. The LME plan should 
be updated based on ongoing monitoring and periodic evaluation findings. External evaluation will 
be planned and managed by USAID to examine activity achievements against the stated objectives 
and document the challenges identified as lessons. 

 

This activity will closely coordinate with other partners working in disaster risk management, 
emergency response, health systems strengthening, governance, and relevant resilience programs 
on the ground. This includes, but is not limited to, local government, existing USAID investments 
operational in the regions, UN agencies and partners (such as WFP, WHO and UNICEF). The 
value add of this sub-national activity will be further enhanced through collaboration with existing 
national investments on data such as the Data Use Partnership (DUP) and Digital Health Activity 
(DHA). Documentation of lessons and continuous learning will be integrated throughout the 
program cycle in order to maximize the impact of the project and ensure quality service delivery. 

 

The PHEM Activity will contribute to the USAID/Ethiopia Mission's Collaborating, Learning, and 
Adapting (CLA) efforts and will feed information into a USAID/Ethiopia Disaster Risk 
Management Developmental Evaluation (DE) to assess whether USAID’s DRM activities, 
including the PHEM activity, are effectively strengthening capacity and systems. The PHEM 
activity will be expected to continually interact with the other activities in the SDRMSI project 
and at frequent intervals (to be determined jointly between USAID and the Implementing Partner), 
there shall be formal ‘pause and reflect’ sessions with all extended partners and USAID to reflect 
on learnings and integrate these learnings into the next year’s work plan. The activity shall 
incorporate adaptation components to respond to DO4 and DO1 projects, in order to continue to 
connect with the monitoring, evaluation, and learning efforts of the other USAID activities in the 
portfolio. 

 

Learning 

 

The LME/CLA plan should clearly define the approach to answering the following key learning 
questions, with a view to informing future investments and testing different approaches for 
effective and sustainable support to strengthen disaster risk management, including PHEM and a 
resilient health system that sustains essential service delivery. 

 


1. To what extent have USAID’s interventions to strengthen public health emergency 
management reduced the risk and impact of disasters? Which modality (empowering 
communities, strengthening institutional risk management, improving the effectiveness of 
humanitarian response) is most effective (for vulnerable and marginalized populations), 
why and how? 
2. Have the PHEM efforts supported the development of a resilient health system? In which 
areas (human resources, governance, financial management, evidence-based decision 
making, and commodity and logistics management,) and to what extent (national, regional, 
zonal and woreda levels)? 
3. What interventions appear to be leading to improved access to quality essential health 
services during emergencies? How can disparities in access be improved, particularly for 
youth and vulnerable women and girls who are at risk of GBV? and which service areas 
(family planning, reproductive health, GBV services) are addressed and service providers 
are involved (public, private)? 
4. What are the dependencies and inter-relations between communities and institutions in 
improving PHEM in the Ethiopia context? How does this relationship impact the 
effectiveness and efficiency of PHEM? What is the sequential nature of capacities 
development for these different stakeholder groups to improve PHEM in Ethiopia? 
5. To what extent do the institutional strengthening interventions (to improve coordination 
structures, early warning systems, preparedness plans, contingency funds, mainstreaming, 
human resources, organizational structure, utilization of data and information 
management) lead to better preparedness and response to disasters? Why and how? In what 
context does early warning not trigger a response at the community level and why does this 
happen? Are there sufficient capacity development investments/interventions at all levels 
of government to truly improve systems? Which PHEM capacities are specific to certain 
shocks versus transferable across shocks? 
6. In what ways and to what extent are activity-level learnings about DRM outcomes and 
essential service delivery outcomes being incorporated into continuous adaptations of the 
award, and the Mission's development objectives approach. 


 

Monitoring 

 

The monitoring approach shall focus on critical performance monitoring data, with exact indicators 
to be defined by the Implementing Partner. Monitoring efforts shall include quantitative and 
qualitative data collection approaches, and that will feed into periodic analysis, learning and 
decision-making and contribute to USAID Ethiopia’s Learning, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
(LME) plan. The activity’s routine monitoring will feed into the USAID Mission’s Development 
Information Solution (DIS) as appropriate. Performance Monitoring Indicators for the activity 
will be reported regularly and incorporated into the USAID Ethiopia’s indicator reporting system. 

 


The following performance monitoring indicators shall be tracked at a minimum: 

 

Purpose: Reduce morbidity and mortality of Ethiopian citizens related to public health emergencies while ensuring 
continuity of essential health services (including MNCH) by strengthening the full cycle of public health emergency 
management: preparedness, response and recovery. 

Targets: 90% of the Health Facilities maintain health care services during the crisis. 

 90% of the epidemics controlled within the acceptable mortality rate. 

Objectives 

Performance Indicators 

Targets 

Objective 1: 

Leadership of public 
health emergencies 
at the local level 
improved. 

 

➔ Number of woredas with progressive 
improvements in emergency Leadership 
responsiveness score52 
➔ Total number of Woreda and zonal officials 
trained on LDM, Coordination and Mentorship 
(disaggregated by sex) 
➔ Total number of local PHIM officials trained on 
surveillance data utilization and evidence-
based actions (disaggregated by sex) 
➔ Number of established effective multisectoral 
coordination forums conducted per woreda53 
➔ Percentage of After-Action Reviews conducted 
of each response activation per year with 
demonstrated improved subsequent scores. 
➔ Number of Simulation/Table-Top exercise 
conducted per year with marked improvement 
in scores over 5 years. 
➔ Presence of registry roaster of expertise who are 
oriented and ready for emergency response on 
call to the EOC. 
➔ Emergency responses implemented per plans 
and in coordinated manner 


➔ Emergency leadership responsiveness score 
reached to 50% and above in all PHEM-
supported areas by 2025. 
➔ 100% of local PHEM leaders trained in full 
LMD curriculum, Coordination and 
Mentorship by the end of the project. 
➔ 100% of local PHEM leaders trained fully on 
surveillance data utilization and timely 
decision making by the end of the project 
➔ 4 coordination forum activity reports per year 
per woreda. 
➔ 100% of PHE response activations are 
reviewed by After action review 
➔ 2 simulations each year in 10 woredas. 
➔ Roster system established in 100% of selected 
zones and woredas by the end of the project 
➔ 100% of emergency responses in selected 
woredas are coordinated and based on the 
preparedness plan 




52 Leadership responsiveness score is a composite indicator that is composed of numerous variables, each weighted 
to reflect accurate score. The criteria for score will be determined in line with MOH and targets are expected to 
progressively increase( 1st year 2 woredas, 2nd year 4 woredas,3rd year 6 woredas,,4th year 8 woredas ,5th year 10 
woredas achieves 50% and more of score on leadership responsiveness).(Ministry of Health ,Emergency, Injury & 
Critical Care System Strategic Plan (2021 – 2025)) 

53 The definition of forum will be defined in the LME plan post award, but examples include having an operational 
plan, conducting regular meetings to evaluate the work done and sharing information and providing coordinated 
responses to health emergencies. 


Objective 2: 

Woreda capacity to 
manage relevant 
public health risks 
increased 

➔ Total Number of Woredas with updated 
risk informed EPRP54. 
➔ Total Number of personnel trained on 
PHEM/BEC. 
➔ Proportion of woredas/HF with established 
and adequately trained and staffed 
response team (RRT/DMAT) according to 
standard/ five years. 
➔ Total Number of woredas with updated 
VRAM. 
➔ Percentage of PHEM responses with 
positive post-response audit findings. 
➔ Presence of innovative approach for local 
risk communication and community 
engagement (RCCE) 
➔ Improved response time to outbreaks over 
5 years55 


➔ 100% of selected woredas developed updated 
EPRP by the end of the project. 
➔ 100% of local PHEM officers and frontline 
workers in selected woredas trained in the full 
PHEM/BEC curriculum by the end of the 
project. 
➔ 100% of selected HFs/Woredas with 
RRT/DMAT according to standard over 5 
years. 
➔ 10 woredas with updated VRAM over 5 
years56. 
➔ 100% PHEM responses have a post -response 
audit. 
➔ RCCE tool in place 
➔ Outbreak response time improved to standard 
in 100% of selected Woredas over 5 years. 


 

Objective 3: 

Local EWARS and 
data management 
capacity 
strengthened 

➔ Establishment/reinvigorating/updating data 
driven decision-making mechanisms and 
processes. 
➔ Total number of personnel/HCW trained on 
data system management and data analysis57. 
➔ Number of woredas that utilize virtual and 
interactive mentorship platforms, and 
monitoring mechanisms. 
➔ Number of local PHEM personnel who 
received the virtual mentoring service58 
➔ The number of emergency outbreaks that were 
informed based on use of EWARS info 


 

➔ Data driven decision-making mechanisms 
and processes fully established in 10 woredas 
➔ 100% of local personnel /HCWs fully 
virtually trained on data management and 
analysis by the end of the project 
➔ Virtual mentorship and monitoring platform 
introduced and exercised in 10 woredas. 
➔ 100% of local personnel /HCWs fully 
received the virtual mentoring service over 
the project period 
➔ 100% of emergency response in selected 
woredas generated based on evidence/ used 
real time data. 




54 This indicator will also be collected by other implementing partners to aggregate the total number supported by 
other USG funded activities such as BRE-TA. Targets are set in line with EPHI, SPM-III 

55 Response time to outbreaks is interval between notification of outbreak to district and concrete response by the 

woreda (Target: within 48 hours of notification) 

56 This indicator will also be collected as a total number of woredas reached by PHEM and other USG funded 
activity, BRE-TA 

57 Target is intended to be in a phased manner (small number in the first 2 years, then full implementation the 
last three years. 

58 Target is intended to be in a phased manner (small number in the first 2 years, then full implementation the 
last three years) 


Objective 4: 

Local Capacity to 
address specific 
gender needs in 
emergencies 
developed: 

➔ Total Number of local personnel trained on 
specific gender needs in emergencies. 
➔ Presence of rapid gender assessment done in 
emergency. 
➔ Presence of Gender in Emergencies (GiE) tool 
and incorporated into EPRP. 
➔ # of woredas in emergencies/sites for IDPs 
integrated MCH, SRH and GBV services into 
their emergency response 


➔ 100% of local PHEM personnel from selected 
woredas trained in full on specific gender 
needs in emergencies by the end of the 
project. 
➔ Rapid assessment done in woredas where 
there has been an emergency. 
➔ GiE tool in place 
➔ 100% of selected woredas incorporate MCH, 
SRH and GBV services in their response. 


Objective 5: 

Local innovation 
Fund for 
emergencies 
increased 

➔ Availability of grant protocol for catalyst 
funding 
➔ Number and size of grants as catalyst funding 
for innovations. 
➔ Presence of local contingency budget Plans for 
predictable shocks 


➔ Catalyst funding protocol in place 
➔ Proportion of innovative raised revenue for 
PHEM/EICC operational financing reached 
2% in 2025. 


 



 

Evaluation 

 

The PHEM activity is expected to contribute to the DRM Development Evaluation (DE) and 
should plan to conduct a summative performance evaluation. The methodology can be determined 
based on the final refined suite of evaluation questions, but the evaluation design should at a 
minimum include the evaluation time frames, budgets, workdays, and methodologies shall be co-
decided between USAID and the Implementing Partner. In general, the evaluation design 

should at a minimum include: 

1. Inclusion of “Effectiveness”59as a primary evaluation criterion for any evaluative efforts 
undertaken as part of the activity CLA/MEL Plan; and, 
2. Incorporation of the following evaluation questions: 
a. To what extent has the activity contributed to the reduction of risk and impact of 
disasters? 
b. To what extent has the activity led to better preparedness and response to disasters 
by the Government of Ethiopia (unit of analysis: institutions where Fellows are 
placed)? 





59 https://www.oecd.org/dac/evaluation/daccriteriaforevaluatingdevelopmentassistance.htm 

 

In addition, the PHEM activity will feed information into a USAID Ethiopia Project-level (SDRM-
SI) developmental evaluation to (1) ensure the DRM PYL activity continually interacts with the 
other activities in USAID Ethiopia’s DRM systems-level Project, and (2) to assess whether the 
PHEM activity is effective in its objectives. 

 


5.2 Data and Reporting Requirements 

 

Data will be collected for each activity level indicator as part of LME plans. The data source 
includes routine data sources such as HMIS, DHIS, the human resource information system, health 
insurance information system, and non-routine information source; assessment, community-based 
surveys and administrative/activity reports, as well as research findings. Efforts will be made to 
integrate PHEM related data elements with routine source and national surveys. Data analysis and 
visualization will be used to analyze and understand the data and generate information for 
evidence-based decisions as well as learning opportunities. Reports will be submitted, and 
performance review meetings will be conducted regularly between AOR and implementing 
partners (IPs) to review activities’ status and identify challenges and design corrective measures 
every three months. The AOR will also conduct weekly follow-up meetings with IPs, as needed, 
to support the performance and ongoing monitoring of the activities. To ensure data quality, data 
quality-assurance techniques will be implemented at each level of the project. In addition, on-site 
visits will be conducted jointly with IPs to visualize the result and verify the reports. As part of the 
external verification process, an external monitoring and evaluation contractor may be used for 
monitoring and data collection and for indicators with ongoing monitoring. Meanwhile, data 
quality audit (DQAs), conducted every two years by the Ethiopian Public Health Institute, will be 
used to enhance reliability and credibility of the project data. The project will comply with 
USAID’s LME policy and international health regulation concerning public health emergencies of 
international concern. 

 

Reporting procedures 

 

Performance Reports: Periodic performance reports are required quarterly within 30 days 
following the end of the reporting quarter. The last quarterly report of the reporting period shall be 
replaced by an annual report summarizing the entire previous year’s accomplishments. Both 
periodic and annual progress reports must meet the general requirements including executive 
summary, summary table for results of indicators with corresponding targets, correlation with 
award monitoring plan and financial summary. 

 

Final Report: The final/completion report shall also contain an index of all reports and information 
products produced under this agreement. The report shall be submitted within 90 days after the 
estimated completion date of this agreement. 

 

In compliance with ADS 201 and ADS 579 regarding data reporting, based on the approved 
activity CLA/LME Plan, co-decided by USAID and implementing partner, the IP must submit all 
performance management information including geographic data into the Development 
Information Solution (DIS) at the required frequencies. For datasets that cannot be submitted to 
DIS, consult with the AOR for submission options including possibly loading to the Data 


Development Data Library (DDL). All processed intermediate and raw data, an online repository 
of project-related information, activity related software development or purchases must be 
accessed by USAID as required. 

 

Performance Management Information Submission 

In compliance with ADS 201 and ADS 579 regarding data reporting, once the Activity Monitoring 
and Evaluation Plan is approved, the Recipient must submit all performance management 
information into the USAID Approved performance management system at the required 
frequencies. Data that shall be submitted to the system include: 

1. Indicator results (baseline and targets will be entered by USAID/Ethiopia based on the 
approved LME Plan) 
2. Intervention locations (including status, start and end dates and approximate financial 
resources for each location). 
3. Submission of reporting/ periodic progress reports/ including supplemental and supporting 
materials. 


 

The AOR will provide system access instructions and training materials as necessary. 

 

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 

Refer to Geographic Data Asset Reporting Requirements for clarification on how to collect 
GIS data and submit GIS data. 

 

References 

Geographic Data Collection and Submission Standards (ADS 579saa) 

 

Non-Spatial Data and Software 

All data the Recipient creates, collects, purchases, or acquires that supports the objectives of the 
activity shall provide a copy of data to USAID through a system provided by USAID including 
the Development Data Library (DDL). 

 

The Recipient shall provide USAID all processed intermediate and raw data when requested. 

 

Software: If the Recipient develops software such as applications/apps to process activity-related 
data, the Recipient must provide such software, documentation of the software, and copy and 
source code of the software to USAID per the Federal Source Code Policy (M-16-21). If the 
implementer develops an online repository of project-related information, then it is mandatory for 
the implementer to provide USAID/Ethiopia full access to this information, including the right to 
extract data. If the implementer buys software with significant resources, a mechanism must be 
worked out with USAID with regards to its use after the project closes out. 

 


6. KEY PERSONNEL 

 

Key Personnel are those individuals whose performance is critical to the success of the 
Cooperative Agreement. The following represent the four (4) Key Personnel positions: 

 

1. Chief of Party 

2. Deputy Chief of Party/Technical Director 

3. Senior Public Health Emergency Management Advisor 

4. Senior Surveillance and Data Management Advisor 

 

The Recipient should propose individuals that they deem appropriate for each position and have 
the technical and management expertise to meet the required qualifications, and preferably the 
desired qualifications of the positions as defined below. All Key Personnel positions should be 
full-time and proposed Key Personnel are expected to be assigned to the PHEM Activity 
throughout the life of the project 

. 

Given the complexity of this activity, USAID expects Key Personnel to have the appropriate 
qualifications and experience to work effectively as a team. 

 

The required and desirable qualifications and responsibilities for the Key Personnel are outlined 
below: 

 

1. Chief of Party (COP) 

 

Program Roles: The COP will be responsible for the overall program leadership, 
management, and technical direction of staff and consultants, project activities such as 
implementation, monitoring, reporting and evaluation, and partner coordination. He/she is 
supposed to serve as key liaison with USAID, government counterparts, and local partners. 
The COP will manage and supervise the work of program personnel and subcontractors/ 
subgrantees and ensure that all program assistance is technically sound and appropriate. 
He/she also oversees program work planning, performance management, and strategic 
communication. 

 

Education: Master’s degree or equivalent in Public Health is preferred. Applicable 
experience in the field of public health and related work can also substitute for a Master’s 
degree. Applicable Experience in the field of public health includes proven experience of two 
years and above in managing public health issues or complex public health emergencies 
involving coordination with multiple program partner institutions. 

 

Specialized knowledge/skills: leadership skill in designing, managing, and implementing, 
monitoring and evaluation of donor-supported programs as well ability to manage 
programmatic and financial reporting requirements, including sub-grants management. 

 

Experience: At least more than 10 years of demonstrated experience managing operational, 
project management and administrative duties for the U.S. Government–funded projects or 


other internationally funded programs. Previous Chief of Party, Deputy Chief of Party, or 
senior management experience in public health, health system strengthening, and/or related 
field in Ethiopia. Proven experience in managing complex public health emergencies 
involving coordination with multiple program partner institutions. 

 

Language: Fluency of English in reading/writing/speaking (Level IV) is required and 
additional fluency in Amharic language is preferred. 

 

2. Deputy Chief of Party/Technical Director 

 

Program Roles: DCOP serves as technical director who will be responsible for providing 
managerial, technical and operational guidance for the program. His/her primary 
responsibilities will be to ensure that the program functions in line with technical priorities of 
the local structure and in line with USG regulations. Thus he/she will need to work closely 
with the Technical Advisors, the Finance Officer, Operational Manager, and the COP. 
He/She will act as the COP in his/her absence. 

 

Education: Master’s degree or equivalent in Public Health, or related areas is preferred, with 
deep understanding and knowledge of the health system strengthening, disaster risk 
management and the public health emergency management. 

 

Specialized knowledge/skills: Management skill in designing, managing, and implementing, 
monitoring and evaluation of donor-supported programs as well technical skill in managing 
public health emergencies. 

 

Experience: At least more than 7 years of demonstrated experience managing operational, 
project management and administrative duties for the U.S. Government–funded projects or 
other internationally funded programs. Previous Deputy Chief of Party, or senior 
management experience in public health, public health emergency management, disaster 
preparedness and management, resilience, health system strengthening, and/or related field in 
Ethiopia. Experience managing complex public health emergencies involving coordination 
with multiple program partner institutions. 

 

Language: Fluency of English in reading/writing/speaking (Level IV) is required and 
additional fluency in Amharic language is preferred. 

 

3. Senior Public Health Emergency Management Advisor 

 

Program Roles: Senior Health Emergency Management advisor will be responsible for 
providing technical and operational guidance for the program. His/her primary 
responsibilities will be to ensure the local health system is resilient, and particularly, the 
Public Health Emergency Management system is responsive to any shocks with due attention 
to building the sub-national capacity to prevent, detect and respond to outbreaks or 
emergencies, and ensure the health system continues to deliver essential services under 
duress. 

 


Education: Master’s Degree in any area of Health/Public Health or related areas. 

 

Specialized knowledge/skills: deep understanding and knowledge of the health system 
particularly public health emergency management: preparedness, response and recovery. 

 

Experience: A minimum of total seven (7) years of resilience or emergency management 
relevant to practical work experience at a senior level in an area of health systems and 
resilience health, specifically in PHEM or outbreak response and management is required. 
Work experience in areas of humanitarian assistance and response and/or prior experience in 
Emergency Operations Center will add value. 

 

Language: Fluency of English and Amharic in reading/writing/speaking (Level IV) is 
required. 

 

4. Senior Surveillance and Data Management Advisor 

 

Program Roles: Senior Surveillance and Data Management expert will be responsible for 
providing technical assistance on surveillance and Early Warning, Alert and Response 
System (EWARS) for public health leaders and PHEM officers at local Levels. The expert 
will also work with health facilities' Managers to ensure EWARS capacities are built at all 
levels of the health system. providing managerial and operational guidance for the program. 

 

Education: Master's in Public Health or related areas preferred. 

 

Specialized knowledge/skills: deep understanding and knowledge of the Early Warning and 
Alert Response System (EWARS), surveillance and data management particularly in public 
health emergency data. 

 

Experience: At least 7 years of demonstrated experience in public health emergency 
surveillance, particularly in disease surveillance, early detection and alert responses, risk 
analysis, data management and/or related field epidemiology activities in Ethiopia. 

 

Language: Fluency of English and Amharic in reading/writing/speaking (Level IV) is required. 

 

 


Attachment 1: Log Frame 

 

The log frame below shows the major interventions identified for this activity, the relationships among the 
components, and the relationship to the development objective. 

 

Narrative Summary 

Illustrative Indicators 

Data Source 

Assumptions 

Purpose: Impact of 
disasters on health 
systems and primary care 
reduced 

90% of the Health Facilities 
maintain health care services 
during the crisis. 

 

90% of the epidemics in 
PHEM-supported regions 
controlled within the 
acceptable mortality rate. 

 

Baseline-end line 
surveys 

 

 

Routine HMIS 

National political/ security situation 
remains conducive for project 
implementation 

 

The occurrence/ frequency of 
shocks/outbreaks remains constant 

Objective 1: Leadership of 
public health emergencies 
at Local level improved 

Number of woredas with 
progressive improvements in 
emergency Governance and 
Leadership responsiveness 
score/MOH EICC score 

 

Woreda Survey 

Turnover is minimal, or mitigated by cross 
training various personnel 

Outcomes: 

 

- Responses are timely and 
coordinated 

 

- Emergency responses 
implemented per plans 

 

 

% of Emergency responses 
implemented per plans and in 
coordinated manner 

 

 

EOC reports 

Activity reports 

After action 
review 

Partner reports 

 

 

 

Other partners are engaged and willing to 
coordinate 

Outputs: 

- Local health officials and 
PHEM focals60 trained on 
leadership and 
management of public 
health emergencies 

- Sub-national health 
officials and PHEM focals 
trained on coordination of 
emergency response 

. 

● Woreda and zonal 
officials trained on 
LDM , Coordination and 
Mentorship 
(disaggregated by sex) 
● Total number of local 
PHIM officials trained 
on surveillance data 


 Project Activity/ 
Training report 

Assessment report. 

Simulation 
exercise/ 
bottleneck analysis 
report 

PHEM report 

Meeting 
report/minute 

There is a strong government PHEM 
structure at sub-national level. 

 

Trained personnel continue working in the 
field of PHEM after the training and apply 
what they learnt in the training/simulation 
exercise. 

Other donors are interested to collaborate 
with PHEM activity 

 



60Sub-national officials and PHEM focals include public health /Health management teams, PHEM staff, 
Surveillance officers/focal points and other relevant personnel in the government PHEM structure. 


- Local level multi-sectoral 
PHE preparedness and 
response plan 
developed/reviewed 

-After Action reviewed and 
best practice documented 
for learnings 

 -Local level emergency 
drills/simulation exercises 
conducted to validate core 
capacities and identify gaps 

- Emergency health 
workforce registry/roaster 
developed 

 

 

utilization and evidence-
based actions 
(disaggregated by sex) 
● Number of established 
effective multisectoral 
coordination forums 
conducted per woreda 
● Percentage of After-
Action Reviews 
conducted of each 
response activation per 
year with demonstrated 
improved subsequent 
scores. 
● Number of 
Simulation/Table-Top 
exercise conducted per 
year with marked 
improvement in scores 
over 5 years. 
● Presence of registry 
roaster of expertise who 
are oriented and ready 
for emergency response 
on call to the EOC. 


Inputs: 

Training: leadership 
development and 
management skills, 

coordination; 

conduct simulation 
exercises 

 

 

 

Objective 2: Woreda 
capacity to manage 
relevant public health risks 
increased 

# of Woredas with core 
capacity to manage public 
health risk 

 

 

Trained officials have sufficient resources 
to implement plans 




Outcomes: 

- Woreda officials’ ability 
to understand relevant risks 
and manage common 
public health emergencies 
improved 

 

Improved response time to 
outbreaks over 5 years 

Survey 

 

PHEM report 

Population trust for public services 
remains stable, or increases 

Outputs: 

- Woredas have emergency 
preparedness and response 
plans 

-WrHO heads, PHEM 
Officers, HWs trained on 
full-cycle public health risk 
management and basic 
emergency care (relevant 
to woreda) 

-Woredas established 
Response team 

- Woreda’s vulnerability 
risk assessment mapping 
activities supported 
technically 

- Post-response audits 
conducted at woreda/zonal 
levels at the end of 
outbreak responses 

-Innovative approach 
established to increase 
local risk communication 
and community 
engagement (RCCE) 

● Total Number of 
Woredas with updated 
risk informed EPRP. 
● Total Number of 
personnel trained on 
PHEM/BEC. 
● Proportion of 
woredas/HF with 
established and 
adequately trained and 
staffed response team 
(RRT/DMAT) 
according to standard/ 
five years. 
● Total Number of 
woredas with updated 
VRAM. 
● Percentage of PHEM 
responses with positive 
post-response audit 
findings. 
● Presence of innovative 
approach for local risk 
communication and 
community engagement 
(RCCE) 


 

 

Project Activity/ 
Training report 

Supervision/ 

Activity/progress 
report 

Post-response 
audits report 

After action 
review 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Inputs: 

TA: guideline 
development, post 
response audit, risk 
communication/ mentoring 
and equipment, woreda risk 
profiling 

Training: PHEM 

 

 

 




Objective 3: Sub-regional 
EWARS and data 
management capacity 
strengthened 

Timeliness and completeness 
in detection and notification 
of risks 

 EPHI data/DHIS 
II 

IT infrastructure will remain functional; 
turnover is minimal or will be mitigated by 
cross-training officials 

Outcomes: 

- WoHO and PHEM 
officers use and interpret 
data /Data driven decision-
making mechanisms 
established. 

 

 

The number of emergency 
outbreaks that were informed 
based on use of EWARS info 

 

After Action 
Review 

Availability of internet connection all the 
time 

Outputs: 

-Establish/update data 
driven decision-making 
mechanisms and processes. 

-Provide training on data 
system management and 
data analysis for local 
personnel/HCW 

-Develop virtual and 
interactive mentorship 
platforms, and monitoring 
mechanisms. 

-Provide PHEM virtual 
mentoring service for local 
personnel 

 

 

 

● Total number of 
personnel/HCW trained 
on data system 
management and data 
analysis. 
● Establishment/reinvigorating/updating data 
driven decision-making 
mechanisms and 
processes. 
● Number of woredas that 
utilize virtual and 
interactive mentorship 
platforms, and 
monitoring mechanisms. 
● Number of local PHEM 
personnel who received 
the virtual mentoring 
service 


 

 

Project Activity/ 

Training report 

 

 

Needs assessment 
report 

 IT instruments or equipment such as 
tablets available for virtual platform 

Availability of internet connection all the 
time 

 

 

Inputs: 

TA and training on data 
management for PHEM 
Officers; 

Training for HEWs, 

IT system gaps needs 
assessment; 

Fill key IT gaps 

 

 

 

Objective 4: Regional 
capacity to address specific 

# Gender-responsive PHE 
responses 

MTR/ Evaluation 
report 

 




gender needs in 
emergencies developed 

Outcomes: 

- Emergency response 
better meets specific needs 
of women/girls 

 # of woredas in 
emergencies/sites for IDPs 
that integrated MCH, SRH 
and GBV services into 
emergency response 

Activity report 

Survey 

Attention to specific needs of women and 
girls will not create a backlash against 
women 

Outputs: 

- Local PHEM directors 
and department heads, 
PHEM Officers and 
woreda/zonal officials 
trained on gender in 
emergencies. 

-Rapid gender assessment 
done in emergency 
situation 

- A ‘gender in 
emergencies’ tool 
developed/adopted 

- 

 

● Total Number of local 
personnel trained on 
specific gender needs in 
emergencies. 
● Presence of rapid gender 
assessment done in 
emergency. 
● Presence of Gender in 
Emergencies (GiE) tool 
and incorporated into 
EPRP. 


 

 

Project Activity/ 

Training report 

Document in place 

Assessment report 

 

 

 Trainees apply the knowledge and skill 

Inputs: 

Training for local officials 

TA for tool development 

Training for woreda 
officials 

 

 

 

Objective 5: Risk financing 
for emergencies increased 

-Contingency line item in 
budgets/crisis modifier 

 

Woreda budgets 

Activity report 

Improved budget management capacity 
will increase woreda officials advocacy 
skills 

Local solutions for emergency response 
exist 

Outcomes: 

-Innovative approaches for 
emergency/outbreak 
response management 
applied 

 

# and size of awards for 
innovation 

 Activity report 

 




Outputs: 

- Grant protocol for 
catalyst funding developed 

- Catalyst funding awards 
made (through a 
competitive process) 

Illustrative indicators: 

● Availability of grant 
protocol for catalyst 
funding 
● Proportion of innovative 
raised revenue for 
PHEM/EICC 
operational financing 


 

 

Project Activity 
report 

 

Document in place 

 

 

 

 Non-public sectors working in the area of 
PHEM exist in the country 

 

Inputs: 

Landscape of private or in-
kind resources available 

Develop funding protocol 
and application formats for 
catalytic grants, 

Promote catalyst funding 

TA for recipients of 
catalyst funding 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1.Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID/Ethiopia intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID/Ethiopia 
intends to provide about US$12 million in total over five years. 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications. 

 

B.2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 

 

Please see Section A4. Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan within the Program 
Description for guidance on expected performance indicators, targets, and baseline data. 

 

B.3 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The period of performance anticipated herein is the date of the Agreement Officer’s signature of 
the award. The entire period of performance is anticipated to be five years from the effective 
date of the award. The estimated start date is November 1, 2022. 

 

B.4 Substantial Involvement 

 

USAID plans to negotiate and award an assistance instrument known as a Cooperative Agreement 
with the successful applicant for this program. Potential applicants should note that USAID policy 
prohibits the payment of fee/profit under assistance instruments. 

 

A Cooperative Agreement implies a level of “substantial involvement” by USAID (see ADS 
303.3.11). This substantial involvement will be through the Agreement Officer, except to the 
extent that the Agreement Officer delegates authority to the Agreement Officer’s Representative 
(AOR) in writing. The intended purpose of the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
involvement during the implementation of the program is to assist the recipient in achieving the 
supported results and objectives of the agreement. USAID/Ethiopia will provide technical 
knowledge and guidance to the awardee on programmatic implementation and promote sharing 
and learning of successes and challenges among the USAID partners implementing this activity. 
USAID’s substantial involvement is required during award administration, as listed below (this 
list does not include approvals required by Standard Mandatory Provisions for Non-US NGOs or 
other applicable law, regulation or provision): 

 

4.1. Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 

 

If at the time of award, the program description does not establish a timeline in sufficient 
detail for the planned achievement of milestones or outputs, USAID may delay approval of 
the recipient’s implementation plan for a later date. Implementation plans include, but are 
not limited to, annual work plans, including planned activities for the following year and 


any subsequent revisions, international travel plans, planned expenditures, event 
planning/management, international meeting preparation. 

 

USAID requires the approval of implementation plans to ensure alignment with stated 
goals, milestones, and outputs. The implementation plan communicates how and when the 
recipient will complete project activities and is drafted annually to describe new activities. 
The AOR’s review will ensure that the implementation plans fit within the scope, terms, 
and conditions of the agreement. 

 

USAID may consider changes to an approved implementation plan when changed contexts 
or new information require a pivot in the activity. 

 

This includes the approval of the recipient’s monitoring and evaluation plans during 
implementation. This describes USAID involvement in monitoring progress toward the 
achievement of program objectives during the performance of the project, including written 
guidelines for the content of annual reports and final evaluations. 

 

During the initial project planning period, the awardee will work closely with USAID to 
establish major milestones, program monitoring indicators, as well as baseline data and 
performance targets which will demonstrate successful achievement of the results addressed 
in the cooperative agreement. 

 

4.2. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation in implementation, 
including, but not limited to, participation in advisory committees and direction and/or 
redirection of activities specified in the program description due to GoE priorities and 
guidance as well as interrelationships with other programs. 

 

a) Approval of Recipient’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plans: – the ME&L 
Plan will be developed by the awardee in consultation with USAID/Ethiopia. During the 
initial project planning period, the recipient shall work closely with USAID/Ethiopia to 
ensure that the ME&L plan clearly links the Recipient’s activity with the objectives and 
targeted outcomes of the Program Description. The jointly developed ME&L plan shall 
be submitted within 90 calendar days of the award for AOR’s approval. 


 

b) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the 
program description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. Direction of 
Redirection of activities specified in the program description due to GoE priorities and 
guidance as well as interrelationships with other programs. The AOR must be present in 
all meetings with government-level officials at the Minister and General levels. All 
communication with GoE officials must be made by the Chief of Party and coordinated 
in advance with the USAID AOR. Exceptions may be granted but must be in writing and 
made prior to any meeting/communication. 


 

c) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members: If the 
Activity establishes an advisory committee that provides advice to the recipient, USAID 
will participate in selection of such advisory committee members and participate as a 



member of this committee as well. Advisory committees must only deal with 
programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative matters. 
1. Chief of Party -TBD 
2. Deputy Chief of Party/Technical Director - TBD 
3. Senior Public Health Emergency Management advisor -TBD 
4. Senior Surveillance and Data Management advisor - TBD 
4.4 Concurrence on the Substantive Provisions of Sub-Awards: 





 

4.3. Approval of Specified Key Personnel: 

 

USAID may designate as key personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. USAID’s policy limits this to a reasonable 
number of positions, generally no more than five positions or five percent of Recipient 
employees working under the award, whichever is greater. The PHEM Activity will require 
experts and specialists in a range of technical and operational areas as outlined in the Program 
Description. 

 

For this activity, USAID determines the following key personnel positions are essential for 
the successful implementation and achievement of activity results. All personnel require 100% 
level-of-effort throughout the duration of the award. In accordance with the Substantial 
Involvement clause of this award, these personnel are subject to the approval of the Agreement 
Officer: 

 

 

 

The recipient must obtain AO’s prior approval of substantive provisions of proposed 
subawards (see definitions in 2 CFR 200). Substantive provisions go beyond existing policies 
on Federal review of recipient procurement standards and sole-source procurement. 2 CFR 
200.308 already requires the recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, 
transfer, or contracting out of any work under an award. 

 

Please note that any sub-awards (sub-agreements) to foreign governmental organizations or 
parastatals of any amount must be approved by the AO, and may warrant additional 
clearances in accordance with ADS 303.3.21.b &c. 

 

4.5. Direct involvement to ensure compliance: 

 

USAID will have direct operational involvement or participation to ensure compliance with 
statutory requirements, Congressional Earmarks and Directives, and other funding 
requirements. 

 

4.6. Agency Authority to Immediately Halt Construction: 

 

Please note: Construction is not eligible for reimbursement under this award. 

 

B.5 Authorized Geographic Code 

 


The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 935. 

 B.6 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the PHEM Activity 
which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring 
the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the 
award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume 
responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, 
program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

 

B.7. Selection of Instrument 

 

Due to the nature of the collaboration implicit in the PHEM award, USAID/Ethiopia believes that 
a Cooperative Agreements (in which substantial involvement will include approval of 
Implementation Plans, Key Personnel, and Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint 
Participation) will likely be the primary vehicle for this initiative, but the actual award type or 
engagement will depend upon the most appropriate mechanism or approach for the intended 
results. 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 Eligible Applicants 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. However, USAID/Ethiopia is targeting new and 
underutilized partners in accordance with NPI. 

 

New Partnerships Initiative (NPI) 

USAID encourages Applicants to align with the principles of the New Partnerships Initiative 
(NPI). NPI will allow USAID to work with a more diverse range of partners, strengthen existing 
partner relationships, and provide more entry points for organizations to work with the Agency. 
The principles behind NPI are outlined in the Agency’s first-ever Acquisition and Assistance 
(A&A) Strategy. 

 

Under NPI, there are multiple modalities for new and underutilized partners to do business with 
USAID. There are also opportunities for traditional partners to receive awards. Under NPI, 
USAID/Ethiopia envisions four possible paths for engagement, each intended to offer different 
entry points for working directly or indirectly with new, underutilized, or established 
organizations. 

 

1. Direct awards to new61 and underutilized organizations that are local entities62 in the host 
country or countries for which the Applicant is applying. New and underutilized partners 
may apply for direct funding via this NOFO. Applicants are eligible if they have received 
less than $25 million63 cumulatively in direct or indirect awards from USAID over the 
past five (5) years. 
2. Direct awards to new and underutilized organizations that are locally established 
partners64, in the host country or countries for which the Applicant is applying. U.S.-
based or international partners are eligible if they have (1) received less than $25 million 
cumulatively in USAID funding over the past five (5) years; and (2) currently have 
additional, non-U.S. Government funding streams that exceed total funding received 
worldwide from USAID (e.g., if an Applicant has implemented $5 million in USAID 
funding, it must demonstrate at least $5 million in funds worldwide from sources other 
than the U.S. Government). 


61 
For additional information on the definition of a new entity, see https://procurement.inl.gov/Small-Business-
Program/Shared%20Documents/DUNS%20FAQ.pdf. Note that USAID reserves the right to consider any funding 
received from an entity's parent or affiliate for purposes of determining whether an entity meets the eligibility 
criteria. 

62 As defined in Automated Directive System (ADS) Chapter 303. 

63 $25 million dollars received refers to actual payments made by USAID to the Applicant in the five years prior to 
the date of the application submission. During the co-creation phase the OAA team will work with CFO to 
adjudicate any issues of eligibility. Further, if invited to the Request for Application (RFA) stage, Applicants will 
need to submit their Representations and Certifications as part of the Application. 

64 
LEPs are organizations that generate significant private development assistance and support effective program 
models through locally-led operations that strengthen partner country capacity and commitment for self-reliance. 


3. Sub-awards65 to new or underutilized partners via prime awardees that serve in a limited 
mentorship role. NPI seeks to shift USAID from viewing successful local capacity 
building as a local organization’s ability to receive and manage federal funding directly 
to measuring success by the strengthened performance of local actors and local systems 
in achieving and sustaining demonstrable results. NPI recognizes the important role and 
capacity that “established partners” (defined as those that already have a financial 
relationship with USAID above the NPI threshold of $25 million in the last five years) 
play in advancing this vision of effective local capacity development. This modality will 
empower established partners to build the capacity of local and locally established 
partners to deliver results for the stakeholders they serve, while also providing these local 
partners with the direct or indirect support they need to meet the requirements associated 
with awards from the U.S. Governments. Established partners will play a support role to 
build the capacity of new and underutilized partners to improve their performance as 
development actors in a number of ways (e.g., through technical oversight, compliance 
support, and mentoring). NPI envisions two modalities of support under this approach: 


65 If an HEI is applying as a prime, NICRA rates should not be applied to the proposed amount of the award that 
will be given as subawards. 

66 
Addenda must specify a minimum of 50 percent of total funding would go to the new and underutilized partners 
to implement through sub-awards, but may choose a larger minimum percentage amount. 

67 USAID’s intent that the initial award recipient would develop the capacity of the sub-recipients so that the sub-
recipients would be eligible to receive a direct award from USAID or other donors in the future. Concept Notes 
proposing this modality should include criteria for the prime recipient to identify and qualify a sub-recipient for a 
direct award, Procedures for making the direct award, and a timeframe for when the direct award will be considered, 
including the limits of USAID funding of the initial award for activities of the sub-recipient. 

68 A U.S. or international organization that works through locally-led operations and programming models. See 
https://www.usaid.gov/npi/npi-key-definitions for additional information. 

a. Modality 3a: Local Entity Sub-Awardees That Move to Direct Awards: Prime 
awardees must pass a percentage of the total funding66 of their awards, to local 
sub-awardees, with a goal of moving them to qualify for direct awards. In 
appropriate cases, USAID might pursue prime/mentor awards with a provision 
for transition awards67 to some local entities during the life of the award. 
b. Modality 3b: Local and Locally Established Partner68 Sub-Awardees: Prime 
awardees must pass a percentage of the total funding of their awards, only to sub-
awardee local partners or locally established partners (LEPs). An award could 
also have a structure in which the prime partner receives a declining percentage 
of the value of the award year-on-year (e.g., from 25 percent in Year 1 to 20 
percent in Year 5). 





 

 

 

4. Direct Awards to Partners to Leverage Private/Non-U.S. Government Funding: NPI also 
seeks to support partnerships with organizations that can leverage their own private (or 
non-U.S. Government) funding, in recognition of the important dual-role that many 
established partners have as both implementers and fundraisers. Organizations of all 
types (academia, non-profit, private-sector, host governments, etc.) can apply, including 
organizations that have received more than $25 million in USAID funding through an 
award or sub-award in the past five (5) years. Awardees must propose additional 
leveraged funds worth a minimum of 50 percent of the total value of the award they seek 



from USAID; this can include in-kind contributions, and non-Federal grants and external 
awards. 


 

USAID will not accept applications from individuals. 

 

C.2 Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

Cost Share is desirable and strongly encouraged in order to amplify the impact of the activity 
and the U.S Government funding. However, while encouraged, it is not mandatory under this 
RFA. 

 

Cost sharing may be provided directly by the Recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and 
foundation donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private 
businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation activities at the country level. 
This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or other facilities or equipment 
which may be used for the program, provided by the Recipient. For guidance on cost sharing in 
grants and cooperative agreements, see 2 CFR 200.306. 

 

C.3 Number of Applications that May be Submitted 

 

Any one entity/organization may submit one (1) application for funding in response to this 
Notice of Funding Opportunity NOFO as a prime awardee. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

D.1. Agency Point of Contacts 

 

Name: Mr. Belay Teame 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist, USAID/Ethiopia 

Email Addresses: bteame@usaid.gov and caddis@usaid.gov 

Name: Mr. Admir Serifovic 

Title: Agreement Officer, USAID/Ethiopia 

Email Addresses: aserifovic@usaid.gov 

D.2 Questions and Answers 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted through e-mail address to the Contracting 
Office mailbox at caddis@usaid.gov. The subject line must state “Questions PHEM 
72966322RFA00004” no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. 
Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished 
promptly to all other prospective applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is 
necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other 
prospective applicant. 

D.3 General Content and Form of Application 

 

USAID/Ethiopia will accept applications from the qualified entities as defined in Section C of this 
NOFO. The Applicant should follow the instructions set forth herein. If an applicant does not 
follow the instructions, the application may be downgraded and may not receive full credit under 
the applicable merit review criteria, or, at the discretion of the Agreement Officer, be eliminated 
from the competition. 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: - the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 


Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) 
number: 

 

72066322RFA00004 

 

Applicant name: 

 

 

Project title: 

 

 

Total USAID funds requested: 

 

 

Proposed period of performance: 

 

 

Applicant’s full address and telephone number 

(Primary or lead applicant) 

 

 

Identification and signature of the primary 
contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email 
address) and the identification of the alternate 
contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email 
address) 

 

 

Name of any proposed sub-recipients or 
partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per 
USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 
303. 

 

Name and Signature of Individuals authorized 
to negotiate terms, conditions and countersigns 
the award (title/ position, email address, 
telephone number) 

 

Organization Unique Entity Identify (UEI) 
(Formerly DUNS Number). 

applicants and sub-awardees/ partners. 

 

Tax identification number, and Letter of Credit 
(LOC) number for the applicant, if available 

 



 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 


Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10-point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 12 
point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application 
submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should 
retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

D.4 Application Submission Procedures 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of 
delivery receipt date and time and/or confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

Email submission 

Applications must be submitted by email to caddis@usaid.gov. Email submissions must include 
the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application 
sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the 
technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g., 
"No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email 
should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, 
Part 1 of 2". 

 

Telegraphic or faxed or hard copy applications are not authorized for this NOFO and will not be 
accepted. 


(a) Cover Page (as discussed above); 
(b) Table of Contents 
(c) Executive Summary (one page 











Applicants may upload applications to http://www.grants.gov. USAID bears no responsibility for 
data errors resulting from transmission or conversion processes associated with electronic 
submissions. 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same 
email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" 
email. 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Ethiopia cannot guarantee 
their acceptance by the internet server. 

Each email with file attachments must not exceed 20MB in size. 

D.5 Technical Application Format 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The Technical Application should consist of the following: 

 

 

Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit review 
criteria. 

 

 

The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical 
Application. 

(d) Technical Application Body (not to exceed twenty (20) pages excluding annexes). 

Based on the Merit Review Criteria, the Technical Application Body will contain the 
following sections: 


1. Technical and Implementation Approach. 
2. Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA)/Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning (MEL) Plan. 
3. Management Approach, Staffing Plan, and Key Personnel; and 
4. Organizational Capacity and Experience. 


The basic purpose of the Technical Application Body is to provide the information necessary to 
allow USAID/Ethiopia to fairly and completely evaluate the applicant under each of the merit 
review criteria specified in Section E of this NOFO. Additional specific guidance for each Section 
of the Merit Review Application Body is set forth below. 

1. Technical and Implementation Approach 


 

The Technical and Implementation Approach is the most important part of the proposed activity. 
It shall demonstrate the Applicant’s capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goal 
of this activity. It shall present a convincing approach to achieve the expected results, and it shall 
be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The technical approach for the PHEM activity 
should be aligned with USAID’s other DRM (DO1) and Essential Service Delivery focused on 
Women and Girls (DO4) investments, as laid out in the Program Description. 

 

As part of the approach, the Applicant shall outline an Implementation Plan (Work Plan), which 
must include illustrative planned activities for the activity’s first year, planned events, planned 
expenditures, activity locations, proposed target woredas and health facilities, knowledge 
management plans, international travel (if any), training and other capacity building efforts, and 
details on target activity participants (i.e. health care workers, local public health officials, local 
private sector partners). It should also include a draft Schedule of Milestones from the beginning 
to the completion of the full program, including all deliverables and plans for dissemination for 
reports and information. 

 

2. Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA)/ Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning (MEL) Plan 


 

The Applicant must include a clear fit-for-purpose Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) 
Plan that outlines how the Applicant will utilize strategic collaboration, systematic and 
continuous learning, and adaptive management to achieve improved development outcomes. 
CLA asks: 

 

● Do you take the time to think critically about your work? (Learning) 

● Are you strategic in who you collaborate with, what you’re learning? and (Collaborating) 

● Do you use those learnings to change accordingly? (Adapting) 

 

The proposed CLA Plan should be fit-for-purpose to enable evidence-driven programmatic 
adaptations by both the Implementing Partner and USAID. The CLA Plan shall outline the 
approaches and resources for learning opportunities for adaptation, measuring results and 
achievements of activity, collaborating, and adapting. Traditional monitoring and evaluation 


(M&E) approaches including indicator monitoring fall under the CLA umbrella, specifically the 
learning section. See the PHEM Program Description for more information on required sections 
of the CLA plan. 

 

3. Management Approach, Staffing Plan, and Key Personnel 


 

The Applicant must include a clear management plan for the proposed activity including key 
personnel, sub-award structure (if proposed), technical and administrative management oversight, 
strategic partnership coordination, and oversight of design, development, key initiatives and 
capacity strengthening activities. 

 

I. Management approach and staffing plan narrative with an accompanying organizational 
chart (as an Annex) that illustrates the management structure of both full time and non-
full-time staff for prime and all subcontractors (if applicable). 
II. Four positions are considered essential for implementation of the activity. These Key 
Personnel positions are as mentioned in Section A item 6 with the minimum 
requirements and responsibilities of key personnel. 


 

Applicants should include these Key personnel positions with a clear definition of roles and LOE. 
The education, knowledge/ expertise, skills, and prior experience of the individuals who are 
proposed must be described in detail. Resumes, letters of commitment, and reference information 
are required for the key personnel. 

 

4. Organizational Capacity and Experience 


 

A description of the applicant’s technical and administrative experience and capabilities in the 
proposed activity area must be included, such as experience in: the programmatic area, 
collaborating with multiple government and private stakeholders, building and strategically 
incentivizing buy-in from government partners so processes are institutionalized, assessing human 
resource capacity gaps and organizational capacity gaps, developing human capacity in low- and 
middle- income countries, managing and implementing projects of similar technical scope and 
complexity. If sub-awards with other organizations are proposed, to the extent possible, pertinent 
aspects such as technical roles, management relations, and level of effort of the organizations and 
individuals involved in the sub-award must be explicitly described. Applicants should also include 
their capabilities to integrate and build the capacity of new and underutilized partners in 
accordance with NPI in Section C1. 

 

5. Appendices 


 

Annexes should be numbered (e.g. Annex 1). If any part of the Technical Application exceeds 
the page limits specified above, USAID/Ethiopia may decide to consider and review ONLY those 
pages up to the applicable limit when evaluating the Application. 

The Appendices, which are not included in the main Technical Application’s 20-page limit, must 
include the following items: 


1) Expanded Logic Model, based on the logic model outlined in the Program Description, 
with draft sub-intermediate results, indicators, baseline and performance targets. 
2) Timeline of milestones from the beginning to the completion of the proposed activities, 
including all deliverables; monitoring, evaluation, and learning; and dissemination of 
reports and information 
3) Resumes for Key Personnel and any essential co-implementers for the proposed activity 
not to exceed three (3) pages each 
4) Additional relevant materials [up to five (5) pages] may also be provided as an appendix. 
These may include the history, structure, accomplishments, and capacity of the applicant 
organization(s). 
1. Technical Approach Charts, Graphs and Maps, and Logical 
Framework 
2. Resumes/CVs & Letters of Commitment 
3. Organizational Chart 





The Applicant is authorized to include any charts, graphs or maps, and a Logical Framework that 
support the Technical Approach Section in the Merit Review Application Body. 

Key Personnel 

i. Proposed Key Personnel CVs (no more than 3 pages per individual) 

ii. Key Personnel proposed minimum requirements (1 page per position) 

Each resume shall be accompanied with a commitment letter from each candidate indicating his 
or her: (a) availability to serve in the stated position, in terms of days after the award; (b) intention 
to serve for the stated term of service; and (c) agreement to the compensation levels which 
correspond to the levels set forth in the cost application. Each resume shall include a minimum 
of three (3) references of professional contacts within the last five years; with complete current 
contact information, including email addresses and telephone numbers, for each proposed key 
personnel candidate. 

This annex should consist of a chart showing the proposed organization for the Program; this chart 
should include, but is not limited to, a representation of the staff reporting lines and relationships 
between the different positions that fully illustrates the management structure of both full time 
and non-full time staff for the Recipient and all sub-recipients; it should be sufficient to illustrate 
the complete human resources needs necessary to achieve the objectives of this Program. 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for merit review purposes, should: 


(a) Mark the title page with the following legend: 


"This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government 
and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed - in whole or in part - for any purpose 
other than to evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this applicant 
as a result of - or in connection with - the submission of this data, the U.S. Government 
shall have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the 
resulting grant. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government's right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without 
restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets ____; and 

(b) Mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following legend: 
1. Cover Page: 
2. SF 424 Form(s): 





"Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the 
title page of this application." 

D.6 Business (Cost) Application Format 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The Business (Cost) application must 
include: 1. Cover Page; 2. SF 424 Forms; 3. Required Certifications and Assurances; 4. Other 
Budget Information; 5. Prior Approvals; 6. Subawards; 7. D&B/SAM Information; 8. 
Performance History; 9. Branding and Marking; 10. Funding Restrictions; and 11. Conflict of 
Interest. 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below): 

Please see Subsection D.3 above for requirements. 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard 
Forms can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for 
SF424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424instructions.html 

Application for 

Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 




3. Required Certifications and Assurances: 





Instructions for 
SF424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424ainstructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for 
SF424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-
424binstructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

The applicant must include the following documents and submit a signed copy as part of the 
Business (Cost) Application: 

 

i. “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
ii. Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
iii. Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 
(i) Guidelines: The following general guidelines apply. 
A. The Cost Application should be for a period of 60 months. 
B. Budget should be stated in US Dollars and the USAID/Ethiopia 
support should total approximately $12 million. 
C. Applicants should assume notification of an award as set forth in 
Section B.2. 



(ii) Spreadsheets Required: The following spreadsheets are required: 
A. A Summary Spreadsheet showing the cost for the major cost 
categories identified. 
B. Separate detailed budgets that provides sufficient detailed information at the 
individual cost line item that is sufficient to allow USAID/Ethiopia to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to 
implement the applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the 
cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. The types of costs should be 
organized based on the cost categories specified above in Section D.6 and 








 

 4. Other Budgetary Information: 

In addition, the following budgetary information should be provided in the Cost Application. 


Annex 1. This budget should contain total amounts for each line item of cost 
for the entire 60-month period (not only should total amount of dollars over 60 
months for each cost line item be included but the cumulative number of units 
– days, trips, months etc. should also be summed). 
C. Separate sheets that breakdown the costs specified in Subsection B above to 
each of the five program years. NOTE: Applicants can alternatively include 
the detailed cost breakdown per year in the overall 60-month summary 
described above. 



(iii) Spreadsheet Format: The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel 
file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) with visible formulas and references and 
must be broken out by project year, including itemization of the federal and non-
federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise 
inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to review the application, and may result in a rejection of the cost 
application. 





 

(iv) Sub-contracts/Sub-agreements: The budget shall include a summary and 
breakdown of the costs allocated for each sub-recipient or sub-contractor involved 
in the activity (unless the agreement or contract is on a fixed amount basis). While 
it is preferred that detailed subcontract or sub-agreement costs be included in the 
overall detailed spreadsheet(s) described above, applicants have the option of 
including separate sub-agreement or subcontract budgets for the sake of clarity. 
(v) Budget Notes: Budget notes are required. These budget notes must provide an 
accompanying narrative by line item which explains in detail the basis for how the 
individual line item costs were derived. The budget notes must be sufficient to 
ensure that USAID/Ethiopia can determine the purpose of every cost item 
proposed, as well as understand the basis for the cost estimate (units and unit cost). 
(vi) Budget Categories: The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget 
categories and information, at a minimum and provides guidance on budget 
category costs. 
A. Salaries – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary 
rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. The Budget 
Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for 
the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written 
policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not 
address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget 
Narrative must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 
B. Fringe Benefits & Allowances – If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate 
approved by an agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such 
rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe 






benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose a rate and explain how the 
applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include 
a detailed breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, 
gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 
C. Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, 
the number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals 
traveling, and the duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs 
must be based on the applicant’s normal travel policies. When appropriate 
please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company 
travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 
D. Equipment and Supplies – Must include information on estimated types of 
equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and quantity. The Budget 
Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the basis 
for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any 
rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of 
comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives 
available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property 
leased. 
E. Contractual – Must include costs of direct program activities, monitoring, 
evaluation, and learning costs, Consultants, Trainings, workshops, monitoring, 
evaluation and learning costs, conferences, campaigns, consultants, sub awards 
and other direct program implementation costs. Specify the budget for the 
portion of the program to be passed through to any subrecipient. See 2 CFR 
200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same 
requirements as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and 
indirect costs. The applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of 
any proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives 
of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
F. Construction – NOT APPLICABLE 





Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by 
position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

NOTE: In accordance with 2CFR 200, “Equipment” means tangible personal 
property (including information technology systems) having a useful life of 
more than one year and a per-unit acquisition cost which equals or exceeds the 
lesser of the capitalization level established by the non-Federal entity for 
financial statement purposes, or $5,000. All equipment must be listed in a 
separate budget line item. 


G. Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, 
such as report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and 
inoculations, equipment rental, office rent, utilities, communication, 
maintenance or service costs, costs associated with implementation of 
Branding and Marking Plan, costs for services not part of the technical 
scope/delivery of the award (i.e. logistical support services) as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the 
applicant. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs 
and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable 
property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the 
type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 
H. Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect 
costs or will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect 
costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. The application must identify 
which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable supporting 
information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 





Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG 

Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit 
your approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA 
was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information 
for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a 
provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. 
See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for 
further guidance. 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA Initial Application 
Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct 
costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If 
chosen, this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all 
Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an 
indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. 
See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further information. 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may 
request, but approval is at the discretion of the AO Initial Application 


Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and 
estimates for the current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of 
executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that 
benefit and are identifiable to more than one program or activity, such 


as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and 
telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently 
across all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits 
of that particular cost to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize 
the 10% de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further 
instructions and may request additional supporting information, including 
financial statements and audits, should the application still be under 
consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve 
the applicant’s requested method. 

 

I. Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost sharing 
resources to be provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources 
of such resources, and the basis of calculation in the budget narrative. 
Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial and in-
kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the resulting 
award. 

 

5. Prior Approvals in Accordance with 2 CFR 200.407: 


Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost in this Section. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information 
regarding which cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

6. Approval of Subawards: 


 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award in this Section. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the 
following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• Unique Entity ID (UEI) Number from sam.gov 



• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s 


Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 

• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

7. SAM Requirements: 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (UEI) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each 
applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from 
requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding 
agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid Unique Entity ID (UEI) number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-
recipients. 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the Applicant is not 
qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another 
Applicant. 

 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

Applicants should address the status of these registrations in this section. 

 

 

 


 

8. History of Performance: 


 

Successful Applicants are required to submit the history of performance information only if 
requested by the Agreement Officer. 

 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed three programs over the last five years, as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-
award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

9. Branding Strategy and Marking Plan: 


 

Applicants are not required to submit a Branding and Marking plan with their applications. 

 

However, the apparently successful Applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any 
resulting award in accordance with 2 CFR 700.16. The Marking Plan may include a request for 
approval of one or more exceptions to the marking requirements in 2 CFR 700.16. 

 

The AO reviews and approves the apparently successful Applicant’s Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan (including any requests for exceptions), consistent with the provisions “Branding 
Strategy,” “Marking Plan,” contained in ADS 303, Pre-Award Terms, and “Marking and Public 
Communications Under USAID-funded Assistance” contained in ADS 303, Mandatory 
Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients, 2 CFR 700.16, and ADS 320 
“Branding and Marking”. 

 


The AO evaluates the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan (including any requests for 
exceptions) for approval consistent with the regulations contained in AAPD 05-11, 2 CFR 
700.16, and ADS 320. 

 

1. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it 
is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 


 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 
(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 
(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the USAID 
logo and brand mark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on the 
USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the NOFO or 
APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when 
acknowledging contributions. 
(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 
(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 
explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the program 
or project. 
(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 








 

 

 


logos. Section VI of the NOFO or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use 
of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 



(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 
(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 
(i) Describe the main program message. 
(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 
(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 
forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, 
(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 



(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 
(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, 
and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 





 

 

 “USAID is from the American People.” 

 

 

 

e. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information 
is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 
data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

f. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement 


 

2. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that 
will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, 
with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for 
the Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section 
VI of the NOFO or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights 
to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 


c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 
portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 
Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 
cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 
(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 
(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, 
informational, media, or communications products funded by USAID; 
(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 
(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 
(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, 
fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity 
cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the 
support of the American people. 



(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 
(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the 
(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 
(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and 
where the applicant will place the marking; 
(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the 
(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 



(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of 
why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 





 

 

 

 

USAID Identity; 

USAID Identity , and 

 

 


(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or 
program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the 
award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of 
material for which an exemption is sought. 
(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant 
must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 
(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 
particular item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or 
product. 
(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking would 
not be cost beneficial or practical. 
(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant must 
identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or otherwise 
be inappropriate. 
(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable international law 
violated by the marking. 








(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 
or commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 
approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure 
the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 
award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 


 

10. Funding Restrictions: 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 


The Applicant should address any issues with these funding restrictions in this Section of the 
Business (Cost) Application. 

 

11. CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten 
(10) calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

 

12. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) – PRE-AWARD 
TERM (February 2012) 

 

(a) An organization, including a faith-based organization, that is otherwise eligible to receive 

funds under this agreement for HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, or care— 

 

1) Shall not be required, as a condition of receiving such assistance— 

 

(i) to endorse or utilize a multisectoral or comprehensive approach to combating 

HIV/AIDS; or 

 

(ii) to endorse, utilize, make a referral to, become integrated with, or otherwise 

participate in any program or activity to which the organization has a religious or 

moral objection; and 

 


2) Shall not be discriminated against in the solicitation or issuance of grants, contracts, or 

Cooperative agreements for refusing to meet any requirement described in paragraph 
(a)(1) above. 

 

(b) An applicant who believes that this solicitation contains provisions or requirements that 
would require it to endorse or use an approach or participate in an activity to which it has a 
religious or moral objection must so notify the cognizant Agreement Officer in accordance 
with the Mandatory Standard Provision titled “Notices” as soon as possible, and in any event 
not later than 15 calendar days before the deadline for submission of applications under this 
solicitation. The applicant must advise which activity(ies) it could not implement and the nature 
of the religious or moral objection. 

 

(c) In responding to the solicitation, an applicant with a religious or moral objection may 
compete for any funding opportunity as a prime partner, or as a leader or member of a 
consortium that comes together to compete for an award. Alternatively, such applicant may 
limit its application to those activities it can undertake and must indicate in its submission the 
activity(ies) it has excluded based on religious or moral objection. The offeror’s proposal will 
be evaluated based on the activities for which a proposal is submitted, and will not be evaluated 
favorably or unfavorably due to the absence of a proposal addressing the activity(ies) to which 
it objected and which it thus omitted. In addition to the notification in paragraph (b) above, the 
applicant must meet the submission date provided for in the solicitation. 

 

13. Pre-Award Costs 

In accordance with 2 CFR 200.458 - Pre-award costs, Pre-award costs are those incurred prior to 
the effective date of the Federal award directly pursuant to the negotiation and in anticipation of 
the Federal award where such costs are necessary for efficient and timely performance of the 
scope of work. Such costs are allowable only to the extent that they would have been allowable 
if incurred after the date of the Federal award and only with the written approval of the Federal 
awarding agency. Pre-Award costs may be authorized at the discretion of the Agreement 
Officer. 

 

14. PRE-AWARD RESPONSIBILITY DETERMINATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 

Upon consideration of award or during the discussions leading to an award, the selected 
Applicant may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the 
Agreement Officer to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. 

IMPORTANT NOTE 

Applicants should not submit the information below with their Applications. The information in 
this section is provided so that Applicants may become familiar with additional documentation 
that may be requested by the AO before award in order to make the responsibility determination: 


These documents may include, but are not limited to: 

1. Audited financial statements for the past three (3) years that have been audited by a certified 
public accountant or other auditor satisfactory to USAID; 

2. Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable; 

3. Copies of organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting manual and 
personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, leave, differentials, 
etc., and indicate whether such policies and procedures have been reviewed and approved by any 
agency of the Federal Government. If so, provide the name, address, and phone number of the 
cognizant reviewing official; 

4. Other documentation, as required by the Agreement Officer, to substantiate that the Applicant: 

● Has adequate financial resources or the ability to obtain such resources as required during the 
performance of the Cooperative Agreement; 

● Has the ability to comply with the award’s terms and conditions, taking into account all existing 
and currently prospective commitments of the Applicant, non-governmental and governmental; 

● Has a satisfactory record of performance. Past relevant unsatisfactory performance is ordinarily 
sufficient to justify a finding of non-responsibility, unless there is clear evidence of subsequent 
satisfactory performance; 

● Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; 

● Is otherwise qualified and eligible to receive a Cooperative Agreement/Grant under applicable 
laws and regulations (e.g., Equal Employment Opportunity Laws). 

 

An award may be made only by the Agreement Officer after making a positive responsibility 
determination that the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management 
competence in planning and carrying out assistance programs, specifically the proposed Activity; 
and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets 
provided by USAID. 

 

For organizations that are new to working with USAID or for organizations with outstanding audit 
findings, or otherwise at USAID’s discretion, USAID may perform a pre-award survey to assess the 
Applicant’s management and financial capabilities. If notified by USAID that a pre-award survey is 
necessary, Applicants must prepare, in advance, the required information and documents. See ADS 
303.3.9.1 at https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303 for more information on pre-award surveys. 

 

Please note that a pre-award survey does not commit USAID to make any award. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 Criteria 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters 
which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which 
all applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section below. 

 

 

Adjective 

Merit Review Criterion 

Exceptional 

An Exceptional application has the following characteristics: 

 

• A comprehensive and thorough application of exceptional merit. 
• Application meets and fully exceeds the Government expectations or exceeds NFO 
objectives and presents very low risk or no overall degree of risk of unsuccessful 
performance. 
• Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that may exist. 


Very Good 

A Very Good application has the following characteristics: 

 

• An application demonstrating a strong grasp of the objectives. 
• Application meets NFO objectives and presents a low overall degree of risk of 
unsuccessful project performance. 
• Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that exist. 


Satisfactory 

A Satisfactory application has the following characteristics: 

 

• An application demonstrating a reasonably sound response and a good grasp of the 
objectives. 
• Application meets NFO objectives and presents a moderate overall degree of risk 
of unsuccessful project performance. 
• Strengths outweigh weaknesses. 


Marginal 

A Marginal application has the following characteristics: 

 

• The application shows a limited understanding of the objectives. 
• Application meets some or most of the NFO objectives, but presents a significant 


overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 

• Weaknesses equal or outweigh any strength that exists. 


Unsatisfactory 

An Unsatisfactory application has the following characteristics: 

 

• The Application does not meet the NFO objectives or requires a major rewrite of 
the application. 
• Presents an unacceptable degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 
• Weaknesses demonstrate a lack of understanding of the Government’s needs. 
• Weaknesses significantly outweigh any strength that exists. 





E.2 Review and Selection Process 

The required format and content for the application are described in Section D. The applications 
submitted will be evaluated using an adjectival rating system, in accordance with the selection 
criteria set forth below. The SC will make a recommendations and the AO makes the final selection 
which applicant(s) should receive the award(s). USAID will collaborate with the apparently 
successful applicant(s) to create a final Program Description that will be included in the award. 
Prior to negotiating an actual award, the Agreement Officer will review the apparently successful 
applicant(s) budget to ensure that costs, including cost sharing, are in compliance with OMB’s and 
USAID’s policies. The costs proposed must be determined to be reasonable, based on the Cost 
Application and other information, before award can be made. Award will be made to the 
responsible applicant whose application is determined to be the best, based on the criteria specified 
in this RFA. The Agreement Officer must also evaluate risk of the apparently successful 
applicant(s) and is charged with the final determination of whether to make an award to the 
apparently successful applicant(s). Among other issues, the apparently successful applicant(s) 
history of performance will be reviewed using the reference information contained in the Technical 
Application, along with any other information deemed relevant by the Agreement Officer or 
Selection Committee. The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally obligate the 
U.S. Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed 
Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either an Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer 
or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID/Ethiopia will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the 
instructions in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the 
following criteria shown in descending order of importance: 

 

Criterion 

Criterion Name 

Importance 

Criterion 1 

Technical and Implementation Approach 

Most important 

Criterion 2 

Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA)/Monitoring, Evaluation, 
and Learning (MEL) Plan 

2nd most important 

Criterion 3 

Management Approach, Staffing Plan, and Key Personnel 

3rd most important 

Criterion 4 

Organizational Capacity and Experience 

4th most important 



 

Additional guidance on the three Merit Review Criteria are set forth below. 

 

 a.1. Evaluation Criterion No. 1, Technical and Implementation Approach: 

 

The technical and implementation approach will be evaluated in terms of overall quality and the 
extent to which the proposed technical approach demonstrates a clear understanding of the 
objectives of the program, a convincing approach to achieve the expected results, and an 
understanding of how this activity connects to USAID’s other DRM and health investments as 


outlined in the Program Description. 

 

This component will also be evaluated for the strength, workability, and completeness of the 
plan. The Applicant will be evaluated on the extent to which the draft Initial Implementation 
Plan (Work Plan) presents a realistic and feasible plan to launch Activity operations in a timely 
manner to achieve results in Year 1. In addition, this Criterion will be evaluated on the extent 
to which the Applicant demonstrates its ability to build a local partnership, including through 
sub-awards to local institutions, and facilitate partnerships among those to meet the activity 
objectives and contribute to the sustainability of its results. 

 

a.2. Evaluation Criterion No. 2, Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA)/ 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan: 

 

This Criterion will be evaluated on the extent to which the proposed collaboration approach 
demonstrates an understanding of the diverse operating environment for this activity; the 
proposed learning approach (including monitoring and evaluation) demonstrates an 
understanding of right-fit learning tools and processes; and the proposed adapting approach 
demonstrates an understanding of how learnings and pivots will be routinely incorporated into 
project management to achieve results. 

 

a.3 Evaluation Criterion No.3, Management Approach, Staffing Plan, & Key 
Personnel: 

 

This Criterion will be evaluated for the overall quality and responsiveness of the management 
plan, staffing plan, and the qualifications of the staff, especially of key personnel, who will 
manage, develop and carry out the activity. 

 

a.4 Evaluation Criterion No. 4, Organizational Capacity and Experience: 

 

This Criterion will be evaluated on the organizational capability and experience of the Applicant 
and its major sub-recipients (if applicable) as demonstrated by its ability to integrate new and 
under-utilized partners, manage technical and administrative aspects of similar programs and 
activities, achieve measurable results, and work effectively and efficiently with key stakeholders 
leveraging expertise to enhance impact. 

 

b. Business (Cost) Review 

 

USAID/Ethiopia will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 


Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 
2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

c. Pre-Award: Revised Application Submission (ONLY applies to those Apparently 
Successful Applicant(s) selected). 

 

Revised Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted as instructed by the 
Agreement Officer. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1. Federal Award Notices 

 Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While 
USAID/Ethiopia anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential 
applicants are hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

The Cooperative Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer is the authorizing document, which 
shall be transmitted to the Recipient for countersignature to the authorized agent of the successful 
organization(s) electronically, to be followed by original copies for execution. 

 

Notification will also be made electronically to unsuccessful applicants pursuant to ADS 
303.3.7.1.b. USAID/Ethiopia will consider requests for additional information pursuant to ADS 
303.3.7.2. 

 

F.2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

The resulting award from this NOFO will contain a provision making the costs of covered 
telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment as specified in 2 CFR 200.216 
allowable through September 30, 2028, only if the non-federal entity has determined that there is 
no available alternate eligible source for the covered services or equipment. 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for 
U.S. Non-governmental organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental 
Organizations. 

 

See Annex 2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

F.3. Reporting Requirements 

Below are the reporting requirements under the cooperative agreement that include financial 
reports, activity planning reports, performance check-in presentations, and expenditure reports: 

a. Financial Reporting 


 


Recipients of USAID funding must submit the Federal Financial Form (FFR) (SF-425) on a 
quarterly basis via electronic format to the AOR and USAID Ethiopia’s Financial Management 
Office. Details on requirements for submission of the financial reports will be included in the 
award document. 

 


b. Activity Planning 


 

Activity planning reports cover the reports that are critical to USAID/Ethiopia’s ability to be 
substantially involved in this Activity. These include annual work plans and a learning, 
monitoring, and evaluation plan. 

 I. Work Plans 

The work plan is intended to express the Recipient and USAID/Ethiopia’s plan to implement the 
Activity. The work plan authorizes specific activities to implement the Activity Description. The 
Recipient shall submit to the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) one electronic 
copy of a draft work plan within 30 days of the agreement, covering the entire five-year period of 
performance. The work plan, complemented by budget narratives, should explain the rationale, 
sequence and timeline of activities that will be implemented during that fiscal year and provide 
additional information determined to be relevant by the AOR. USAID will review the draft life-
of-activity work plan and provide comments/suggestions. The Recipient shall then submit one 
electronic copy of the final life-of-activity work plan to the USAID AOR for approval not later 
than 15 days from receipt of USAID’s comments/suggestions. 

The Recipient shall also submit one copy of the final approved life-of-activity work plan to the 
Agreement Officer. The Recipient shall submit one electronic copy of subsequent draft revisions 
and updates to the life-of-activity work plan to the AOR annually. The Recipient shall report any 
significant work plan changes or revisions to the AOR and shall obtain the AOR’s approval prior 
to implementing or undertaking such changes or revisions. Work plans and changes/revisions 
thereto must be within the scope of the Activity Description of this Associate Award. Work plans 
and changes thereto shall describe activities to be conducted during the period at a greater level of 
detail than the Activity Description but shall not serve to change the Program Description in any 
way. 

Work plans should not be submitted to USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 
Details on the Work Plan will be provided in the award document. 

II. Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA)/ Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 
(MEL) Plan 

 

USAID has integrated Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) into all aspects of its 
operations and programming to achieve better development outcomes. ADS 201.3.4.10 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning explains USAID’s policy for activity-level monitoring and 
evaluation. The ADS policy states that activities must have an approved plan in place before major 
implementation actions begin. 

The CLA Plan is due within sixty (60) calendar days from the award start date. The Awardee shall 
submit an updated CLA Plan thirty (30) calendar days before the beginning of each subsequent 
fiscal or agreement calendar year. The CLA plan should not be submitted to USAID’s 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). The CLA Plan shall include routine 
collaboration and learning events and a final learning event, amongst other requirements. Full 
details on the requirements for the CLA Plan will be provided in the award document. 


c. Performance Reporting 


 

Performance monitoring reporting, to be outlined in the CLA/MEL Plan, is intended to ensure that 
USAID has sufficient information to effectively monitor the Activity’s performance. This includes 
any information regarding any development that may have a significant impact on performance, 
including, but not limited to challenges encountered, and relevant context and information on costs 
incurred compared to the approved budget plan for the Agreement. The Activity’s Performance 
Monitoring Reporting differs from Financial Reporting as the latter is intended to address cash 
flow needs and not performance. 

 I. Quarterly Progress Check-in Presentations 

The quarterly Progress Check-in Presentation shall be formatted as a slide deck, not exceeding 10 
slides (excluding annexes). The Implementing Partner will provide a short 30-minute presentation 
quarterly to the USAID activity management team and it shall be used as an adaptive management 
tool. 

The slide deck may include the following information: 

1. A summary of activities and key results and achievements. Actual achievements of the 
quarter, that should be presented in quantitative terms whenever possible and described 
in relation to results established in the work plan; 
2. Information on management issues, including administrative, or coordination problems; 
3. A comparison of actual accomplishments established for the period; 
4. Reasons why planned activities did not take place (if applicable); 
5. Other pertinent information as specified by the AOR in writing; 
6. Plans and intended outputs for the following quarterly period; 
7. Annexes: cumulative list of reports/studies/documents sent to USAID’s Development 
Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) and datasets submitted to the Development Data 
Library (DDL); Other annexes as applicable. 


The detailed format of the presentation will be developed in collaboration with the AOR. The 
Recipient shall discuss with the AOR any issues identified as a result of these presentations, 
including, but not limited to, data quality and cost issues, to determine appropriate follow-up 
actions, including providing additional information as necessary to clarify performance issues. 
The Quarterly Progress Check-in Presentation will not be submitted to USAID’s Development 
Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). 

II. Quarterly Learning Briefs 

Quarterly Learning Briefs shall outline key learnings from the quarter’s activities and include 
learnings associated with the activity’s collaboration with its university and GoE partners, ongoing 
monitoring findings, and process-oriented adaptive management learnings. Planned and ongoing 
learning efforts should also be documented and reported in the briefs. In addition, the briefs shall 
answer USAID Learning Questions for Project 1, Strengthening Disaster Risk Management - 
Systems and Institutions (see PHEM Program Description for Learning Questions). 

The brief shall not exceed 6 pages in total and will be used as a discussion tool during the quarterly 
check-ins. The exact format of the brief will be developed in collaboration with the AOR. USAID 


will facilitate sharing of these lessons learned between IPs, so any confidentiality or proprietary 
information concerns should be noted as and when appropriate. Efforts to identify, share, and 
adapt based on learnings should also be an integral part of the PHEM CLA/MEL Plan. The 
Quarterly Learning Briefs should be submitted to USAID’s Development Experience 
Clearinghouse (DEC). 

II. Quarterly Expenditure Reports 

The Recipient will submit a brief separate quarterly Expenditure Report to USAID within 30 
calendar days after the end of each quarter of the fiscal year during the performance period. The 
Expenditure Report, Progress Check-in Presentations, and Learning Briefs shall be submitted 
together. 

 III. Annual Performance Reports 

The Recipient will submit annual reports to USAID within 30 calendar days after the end of the 
reporting period. In this regard, the USAID’s annual reporting time covers the period from October 
01 to September 30. The Annual Report shall contain the following information: 

1. A summary of key achievements; 
2. A comparison of actual accomplishments against goals established for the period in the 
annual work-plan; 
3. Explanations of any issues related to data quality; 
4. A summary of funds expended during the fiscal year by funding source; 
5. A cumulative list of reports/studies/documents sent to USAID’s DEC and datasets 
submitted to the DDL; 
6. A summary of lessons learned and summative answers to USAID Project 1 Learning 
Questions; 
7. Information on major challenges and constraints faced during the performance period 
being reported; and 
8. Prospects for next year’s performance. 


Upon receiving AOR approval, the approved Annual Report shall be submitted to the USAID’s 
DEC. Details on the requirements for the Annual Progress Reports will be provided in the award 
document. 

 IV. Close out Report 

 

In order to efficiently close-out this program and reduce time and costs for both parties, 
USAID/Ethiopia requests that, 180 days prior to the completion date of this agreement, the 
Recipient shall submit a demobilization plan for AO and AOR approval. 

 

The demobilization plan shall include a) property disposition plan, b) plan for the phase-out of 
operations, c) delivery schedule for all reports or other deliverables required under the agreement, 
and d) timetable for completing all required actions in the demobilization plan, including the 
submission date of the final property disposition plan to the Agreement Officer. 

 V. Final Performance Report 


The final performance report will be due 90 calendar days after the period of the activity 
performance end date. The Recipient shall submit a draft of the final report to the AOR 45 days 
following the estimated completion date of the Activity. 

This Final Report will include the following information: 

1. Overall activity accomplishments, presented in quantitative terms and described in a 
narrative that relates activities, products, and results to the Work Plan; 
2. Discussion of why unexpected progress, positive or negative, was made toward the 
planned results. If expected activities were not achieved, the partner shall seek to 
determine and explain the reason; 
3. Analysis of lessons learned and summative answers to USAID Project 1 Learning 
Questions; 
4. Summary of responses to problems encountered during implementation; 
5. A bibliography of all products, tools, reports, and studies produced through the activity; 
and 
6. Other pertinent information communicated by the AOR in writing within 15 days of the 
end of the agreement. 


The Final Performance Report will cover the entire period of the award. The Recipient shall submit 
a draft of the final report to the AOR within 90 days following the estimated completion date of 
the cooperative agreement. The Recipient shall submit one electronic copy of the final Performance 
Report to USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). The Recipient shall submit to the 
AO and the AOR and to one of the following: 

 

●Via E-mail: 
DocSubmit@usaid.gov; 

●Via Fax: (202)216 -3515; or 
●Online: http://dec.usaid.gov. 

 

d. Submission to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications 

 

Per ADS 540.3.2.3, documents and development assistance activity descriptions produced or 
funded with USAID resources and created in support of Intellectual Work must be submitted for 
inclusion in the DEC. The recipient must provide the AOR one copy of any Intellectual Work that 
is published, and a list of any Intellectual Work that is not published. 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit Intellectual Work, whether published or not, to the DEC, 
either on-line (preferred) or by mail. The recipient must review the DEC Web site for submission 
instructions, including document formatting and the types of documents to submit. Submission 
instructions can be found at: http://dec.usaid.gov. For purposes of submissions to the DEC, 
Intellectual Work includes all works that document the implementation, evaluation, and results of 
international development assistance activities developed or acquired under this award, which may 
include program and communications materials, evaluations and assessments, information 
products, research and technical reports, progress and performance reports required under this 
award (excluding administrative financial information), and other reports, articles and papers 
prepared by the recipient under the award, whether published or not. The term does not include the 


recipient’s information that is incidental to award administration, such as financial, administrative, 
cost or pricing, or management information. 

 

Each document submitted should contain essential bibliographic information, such as 1) 
descriptive title; 2) author(s) name; 3) award number; 4) sponsoring USAID office; 5) development 
objective; and 6) date of publication. 

 

The recipient must not submit to the DEC any financially sensitive information or personally 
identifiable information, such as social security numbers, home addresses and dates of birth. Such 
information must be removed prior to submission. The Recipient must not submit classified 
documents to the DEC. 

 

In the event award funds are used to underwrite the cost of publishing, in lieu of the publisher 
assuming this cost as is the normal practice, any profits or royalties up to the amount of such cost 
must be credited to the award unless the schedule of the award has identified the profits or royalties 
as program income. 

 

F.4. Program Income 

 If it is expected that program income might be generated under this program, then program 
income earned under the resulting award shall be added to the program and used to further 
eligible program objectives as agreed upon by USAID. Applicants should describe how program 
income might be generated under the proposed activities and how it envisions program income 
being utilized to successfully accomplish program objectives. Program Income, if any, will be 
accounted for in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307 for U.S. organizations or the Standard 
Provision entitled Program Income for non-U.S. organizations. 

 

F.5. Environmental Compliance 

 In accordance with USAID policies and procedures related to environmental compliance ADS- 
Chapter 204, the Disaster Risk Management Strengthened Development Objective (DO1) 
prepared umbrella Initial Environmental Examinations (IEE) that covers PHEM activity and 
received BEO’s approval on 1/15/2020 and remains valid. Pursuant to 22 CFR 216.2(c)(2)(i, ii, 
iii, v, and xiv) the proposed activity is given a Categorical Exclusion determination from further 
environmental review. The IEE for this activity will be shared with the apparently successful 
applicant at a later stage. 

 

a. General 

 

1. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact 
of USAID’s activities on the environment be considered, and that USAID include 
environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) 
and in USAID’s Automated 


 Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 


(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/), which, in part, require that the potential 
environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final 
decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all 
activities. The Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this Request for 
Applications. 

2. In addition, the contractor/recipient must comply with host country environmental 
regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between 
host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 
3. No activity funded under this Grant will be implemented unless an environmental 
threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, 
as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau 
Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as 
“approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 


 

b. Implementation Plans 

 

1. As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the AOR and Mission Environmental Officer or Bureau 
Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and planned activities 
under this grant to determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 
216 environmental documentation. 
2. If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 
216 environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation 
for USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to 
receiving written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 
3. Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation 
is submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 


 

F.6. Other Requirements 

Success Stories/Events During the performance of this activity for each project component, some 
special reporting may be required from the Recipient such as a brief paragraph on note-worthy 
activities and events, successes stories etc. The success stories/events should be written to reach a 
broad audience, both inside and outside of USAID/Ethiopia, and should be provided in English. 
Mandatory photo captions and credit should be included with the success stories/events. 

 

 [END OF SECTION F] 

 

 


 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS 

 

 

G.1 Points of contact (POC): 

 

 See Section D.1 for Points of Contact (POC) for questions while this NOFO is open. 

 

G.2. The Agreement Officer Representative (AOR): 

 

The AOR for this Award is [TBD] and will be designated after Award. 

 

 

G.3. Different contacts for distinct kinds of help, 

 

For technical assistance related to www.Grants.gov, applicants may contact Helpdesk at 1-
800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov 

 

 

G.4 Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in 
USAID’s acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for 
all organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 [END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an 
award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 

Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H]


ANNEX 1 – BUDGET FORMATS 

 

SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

ARA Total Estimated Amount (TEA) 

PHEM Core Budget Categories 

 Year 1 

 Year 2 

 Year 3 

 Year 4 

 Year 5 

 Total All 
Years 

1. Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. International Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Local In-Country Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Fringe Benefits and Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Total 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. International travel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Local and domestic 
travel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Equipment and Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 




a. Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Equipment and 
Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. Contractual (Program 
Implementation) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Direct Program activities 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Training; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 c. MEL costs; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d. Consultants 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Subgrants. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Contractual/Program 
Implementation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Equipment operation costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Insurance/Travel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. Office operation costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d. Communication costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Other 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Total Other Direct 

Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Indirect Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Material Handling 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Overhead 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. G&A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Indirect Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTALS (Direct 
and indirect 
costs) 

 

 

 

 

 

Approximately 
$12 Million 



 

 

 


 DETAL BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Please include all detailed costs under the following cost categories and subcategories. 

 

PHEM Core Budget Categories 

 Year 1 

 Year 2 

 Year 3 

 Year 4 

 Year 5 

 Total All 
Years 

1. 

 

Personnel 

a. International Staff 

i. Expatriate Staff 
ii. HQ Technical Staff 


b. Local In-Country Staff 

i. Program Staff 
ii. Operational 
Staff 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. 

 

Fringe Benefits and Allowances 

a. Fringe Benefits 
b. Allowances 


 

 

 

 

 

 

3. 

 Travel 

a. International travel 
b. Local and domestic travel (car rental, 
taxis etc.) 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 




4. 

Equipment and Supplies 

a. Equipment (equipment with a unit 
cost greater than $5,000) 
b. Supplies (equipment with a unit 
cost less than $5,000, including but 
not limited to work stations & 
chairs, file cabinets, computers, 
cellular phones, printers, etc.). This 
cost category does not include 
office supplies, which should be 
included under Miscellaneous 
Direct Costs. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

5. 

Contractual 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. 

Direct Program activities (including fixed-
price, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

but not cost type, subcontracts). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. 

Training; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

MEL costs; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d. 

Consultants (including but not 
limited to expatriate consultants, 
local consultants, studies, analyses, 
etc.) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e. 

Subgrants. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. 

 Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 




a. 

Equipment operation costs (e.g. including, but 
not limited to, vehicle rental/lease, vehicle 
and equipment maintenance/fuel/repair, 
motorcycle fuel/maintenance, generator 
fuel/maintenance, software licenses) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. 

Insurance/Travel (e.g. DBA, Medevac, visas, 
permits, immunizations, exams, vehicle 
insurance, equipment insurance, other 
insurance) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. 

Office operation costs (e.g. 

rent/utilities/repairs/maintenance, security 
services, office supplies, make ready costs) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d. 

Communication costs (e.g. general 
communications expense, mobile/cellular 
communication, internet, 
printing/photocopying, courier) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e. 

Other (e.g. professional fees – 
audit/legal/payroll, branding & marking, 
banking fees) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Indirect Charges 

a. Material Handling 
b. Overhead 
c. G&A 


 

 

 

 

 

 

TOTALS (Direct and indirect costs) 

 

 

 

 

 

Approx $12 
Million 



 


 

ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 

 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that 
is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 

 

 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 

 

 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 




 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 




 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

 

[END OF PROVISION] 

 

 



 

 


 

ANNEX 3: ACRONYMS 

 

AOR=Agreement Officer Representative 

BEC=Basic Emergency Care 

BRE=Building Resilience in Ethiopia 

CDC=Centers for Disease Control 

CDCS=Country Development Cooperation Strategies 

CHIS=community Health Information System 

CLA=Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting 

COP=Chief of Party 

DHIS2=District Health Information Software 2 

DHA=Digital Health Activity 

DIS=Development Information Solution 

DMAT=Disaster Management Assistance Teams 

DO=Development Objective 

DQA=Data Quality Audit 

DRM=Disaster Risk Management 

DRM-CB=Disaster Risk Management-Capacity Building 

DRM-PYL=Disaster Risk Management Professionalization and Youth Leadership 

DUP=Data Use Partnership 

ECCD=Emergency and Critical Care Directorate 

EER=Effective Emergency Response 

EICC=Emergency, Injury and Critical Care 

EOC=Emergency operation center 

EPHI=Ethiopian Public Health Institute 

EPRP=Emergency preparedness and response plan 

EWARS=Early Warning and Alert Response System 

FCDO= Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office 

FETP=Field Epidemiology Training Program FP=Family Planning 

GBV=Gender Based Violence 

GHSA=Global Health Security Agenda 

GiE=Gender in Emergencies 

GoE=Government of Ethiopia 

HEW=Health Extension Workers 

HNP=Humanitarian Needs and Priorities 

HO=Health Office 

HRH=Human Resource for health 

HSTP=Health Sector Transformation Plan 

HWs=Health Workers (HWs) 

IHR=International Health Regulations 

IP=Implementing Partners 

IR=Intermediate Result 

IT=information technology 

LDM=Leadership Development and Management 

LME=Learning, Monitoring and Evaluation 


MCH=Maternal and Child Health 

MNCH=Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health 

MOH=Ministry of Health 

MSF=Medicines Sans Frontiers 

NIMS=National Incident Management System 

PH= Public Heath 

PHEM=Public Health Emergency Management 

PHC=Primary Health Care 

RCCE=risk communication and community engagement 

RHBs=Regional Health Bureaus 

R2=Office of Relief & Resilience 

RRT=Rapid Response Team 

SAGE=Strategic Advisory Group for Ethiopia 

SDRM-SI=Strengthening Disaster Risk Management Systems and Institutions 

SP=Strategic Principle 

SRH=Sexual Reproductive Health 

TA=Technical Assistance 

TD=Technical Director 

USAID=United States Agency for International Development 

USG=United States Government 

UN= United Nations 

UNICEF=The United Nations Children’s Fund 

WASH=water, sanitation and hygiene 

WHO= World Health Organization 

WFP=World Food Program 

VRAM=vulnerability assessment and risk mapping 

 

 

[END OF NOFO 72066322RFA00004] 


