Table of Contents 

 
SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ............................................................................... 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ............................................................ 18 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION ........................................................................ 21 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ................................ 22 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION .................................................... 40 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ....................... 44 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) ....................................... 59 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION .................................................................................. 60 
ANNEX LIST .............................................................................................................................. 61 


 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

A.1. PURPOSE PROGRAM PURPOSE AND SUMMARY 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID)’s ultimate goal is “to achieve 
greater development outcomes and work toward a time when foreign assistance is no longer 
necessary”1. Local development actors play a fundamental role in determining a country’s journey 
to self-reliance. Self-reliance happens with “host country governments and partners to achieve 
locally-sustained results, helping countries mobilize public and private revenues, strengthening 
local capacities, and accelerating enterprise-driven development”. To reach this ultimate goal, the 
Agency is reorienting its strategies, partnership models, and program practices to achieve greater 
development outcomes. 

1 The Journey to Self-reliance, USAID, 2020. 

2 The World Economic Forum defines sustainable development impact as integrating and leveraging the best 
examples of public-private cooperation, systems thinking to progress the Sustainable Development Agenda led by the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 

 

Lessons learned from implementing activities have resulted in a different model for development 
promoting local leadership, seeking creative approaches to foster self-reliance, and identifying new 
sources of funding to sustain partnerships and scale impact. USAID/Colombia has long partnered 
with local partners to advance the Mission’s development objectives. In recent years, 
USAID/Colombia has signed a significant number of direct awards with local partners. These 
local partners represent a wide range of entities which include cooperatives, businesses, family 
foundations, corporate foundations, civil society organizations, Universities, and ethnic 
organizations. 

 

Through the “Strengthening Together Activity” (this Activity), USAID/Colombia seeks to 
enhance USAID/Colombia local partner’s development impact by improving their operational 
functions. Examples of operational functions include supporting local partners prioritizing 
activities, demonstrating measurable impact, fostering strategic planning, and mobilizing 
Colombia’s domestic resources. The Activity will benefit USAID/Colombia’s current and 
upcoming planned mechanisms awarded to local partners (see Annex 1 for an updated list). Based 
on past experience and consultations, a local partner would benefit from one-on-one guidance on 
implementing recommended actions from their Pre-Award Survey, creating a coherent 
Institutional Strengthening Plan and/or strengthening their communication strategic plan and all 
other capacity building interests the local organization would like to improve upon. 

 

In doing so, through this Activity, USAID/Colombia will be supporting its current local partners 
by improving their performance, organizational growth and sustainability. It could also provide 
partners with tools and resources on monitoring, learning and adapting and improving their 
communications and outreach. Finally, this Activity will strengthen the marketplace for 
organizational capacity building services, so future local partners can access these tools and 
resources. 

 

A.2. BACKGROUND 

 

Colombia has a wide and diverse set of organizations seeking sustainable development impact2. 
Studies have found that Colombia has over 300,000 registered non-profits, corporate foundations, 


community-based organizations, and ethnic organizations. This gives Colombia the second most 
civil society and philanthropic organizations per capita in the Western Hemisphere. These 
organizations have developed through years of conflict and adversity, demonstrating their 
resilience and dedication. 

 

USAID/Colombia has been investing in local capacity building for many years through its various 
development activities. More than 250 civil society and grassroots organizations have been 
strengthened. Some have become sub-grantees in these activities, and others have even gone on 
to become direct awardees of USAID, demonstrating a progressive path towards greater selfreliance, 
sustainability, and a new way of doing business with local organizations. 

 

A.2.1. USAID’s approach to Local Partners: 

 

USAID/Colombia has long recognized the opportunities to build the capacity of local partners. 
Over the past five years, USAID/Colombia has increasingly expanded its partnerships with various 
types of local organizations, such as local civil society organizations, family foundations, corporate 
foundations, and private companies, mainly through sub-grants and sub-contracts under 
experienced implementing partners. However, with all this work on local strengthening and 
capacity building, challenges still exist. In 2015, USAID/Colombia mapped and surveyed its local 
partners, demonstrating that local organizations have the potential to improve their capacity. 
Moreover, during the last year, consultations led by the USAID/Colombia team demonstrated a 
clear need to strengthen local partners’ administrative/organizational capacity, networks, 
messaging, program cycles, partnership building, and knowledge management structures3. 
Indeed, in early 2020, USAID/Colombia designed an internal survey for its local partners, the 
majority of whom voiced their desire to strengthen their alliance building and fundraising skills, 
gender approach, knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation capacity, and strategic 
communications. 

3 CDCS consultation with civil society and philanthropic organizations in Bogotá, U.S. Embassy, April 9, 2019; One 
on one interviews and focus group consultations with associations, corporate foundations, civil society organizations, 
grant awarding organizations, and grassroutes in Colombia were held during 2019. In addition, research was 
complemented with findings from pre-award surveys prepared by USAID/Colombia. 

4 Revista Dinero, Editorial “La Brecha Social” Septiembre 18, 2020. 

5 Survey by DANE “El Pulso Social” 

 

A.2.2. Lessons Learned from COVID-19: 

 

Preliminary data in Colombia is demonstrating the challenges resulting from the COVID-19 virus. 
Colombia’s National Center for Statistics (DANE) estimates that between 2020-2021 the economy 
will contract between seven and nine percent4, which will result in more than four million people, 
particularly women and youth, losing their jobs. Poverty, exclusion, and gender-based violence 
are only a few of the critical challenges that local organizations are tackling on the ground. 
COVID-19 has underlined the crucial importance of local organizational capacity, risk mitigation, 
adaptation, sustainability, and resilience. Economic recovery will likely be the most challenging 
for vulnerable populations such as conflict survivors, women, LGTBI, Afro-Colombians, 
indigenous, and Venezuelan migrants5. However, it has also shown that local organizations may 
face challenges finding the time and resources to directly invest in their own capacity-building in 
the current context of economic uncertainty. 

 


In addition, COVID-19 has amplified the technology and connectivity gaps in Colombia’s public, 
private, and social sector. The United Nations e-Government Development survey scores all 
countries where Colombia ranked at 61 and the Global Competitiveness Report ranked Colombia 
at 57, suggesting that the country’s digital divide poses a significant challenge to overall 
development. Both of these rankings demonstrate the economic challenges raised by the country's 
lag in adopting technology and innovation. 

 

Recently, USAID published a Digital Strategy which states, digital technology has the power to 
spur economic growth, improve development outcomes, and lift millions out of poverty. At the 
organization level, digital connectivity and technology have the power to transform and increase 
access to data and networks, provide e-learning, improve organizational effectiveness, and 
accelerate evidenced-based decision making. 

 

A.3. USAID/COLOMBIA STRATEGY 

 

Sustainable and inclusive development in Colombia requires a strong state presence, an informed 
and participatory citizenry, and support for licit economic opportunities. Recently, 
USAID/Colombia published its 2020-2025 Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS)6 
with the overarching goal of a more stable, peaceful, and prosperous Colombia through inclusive 
governance and equitable growth. Local partners have been prioritized as a key stakeholder in 
achieving this goal. The Activity will contribute to the overarching goal and support the large 
local development portfolio responding to the Mission’s three Development Objectives (DOs) and 
one Special Objective (SO). It is built upon lessons learned from previous and ongoing activities 
and their implementation. 

6 USAID/Colombia CDCS: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Colombia_CDCS_Narrative_Public-Oc7-2020.pdf 

 

 

 


Graphic 1 - Source: USAID/Colombia Country Development Cooperation Strategy 2020-2025 

 

A.4. THEORY OF CHANGE 

 

IF USAID/Colombia builds its local partners’ organizational capacity, THEN they (local partners) 
will be more self-reliant, improve performance, and more effective at achieving their development 
objectives. 

 

This theory of change is built upon the assumptions that: 

 


• The security, social, and political situation in Colombia is dynamic, but allows for activity 
implementation. 
• Target organizations remain open to receiving USAID assistance and building their 
capacity. 
• Target organizations who operate in the Colombian social sector are willing to engage in 
relevant actions with other actors and improve the social ecosystem; and 
• USAID and GOC funding levels remain stable. 


 

Given the complexity of the current development landscape in Colombia, the theory of change will 
need to be as this will be essential for monitoring, evaluation, and learning actions. 

 

Beneficiary: The Activity will support USAID/Colombia’s current and planned mechanisms that 
are awarded to local organizations therefore, the Mission’s direct local partners (see Annex 1 for 
an updated list). In addition, there will be some actions and grants opportunities to other local 
organizations not directly supported by the Mission. 

 

A.5. OBJECTIVE AND RESULTS 

 

The Activity is composed of the following objectives: 

 

• Objective 1: Increased organizational capacity7 of USAID local partners for improved 
performance8. 
• Objective 2: USAID local partners adopt a Collaboration, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) 
approach9. 
• Objective 3: USAID local partners improve outreach; and 
• Objective 4: Colombian organizations effectively provide valued capacity building 
services. 


7 The National Council of Nonprofits defines organizational capacity as “capacity building enables nonprofit 
organizations and their leaders to develop competencies and skills that can make them more effective and 
sustainable, thus increasing the potential...to enrich lives and solve society’s most intractable problems”. 

8 The Organizational Performance Index (OPI) identifies the four key domains of organizational performance as 
effectiveness, efficiency, relevance, and sustainability. 

9 CLA Facht Sheet https://usaidlearninglab.org/qrg/understanding-cla-0 

 

The Activity should consider how the four Objectives can be provided and strengthened through 
a diverse set of digital connectivity and technology constraints and opportunities. 
USAID/Colombia’s local partners have diverse digital strategies thus, the NOFO Awardee should 
consider recommendations and solutions to increase access to data, networks, and e-learning, via 
digital platforms, tools and applications and integrate this through all of the objectives. 

 

A.5.1 OBJECTIVE 1: Increased organizational capacity for improved performance 

 

The first objective of the Activity looks to increase organizational capacity for improved 
performance. Intermediate results under this objective include enhancing internal systems and 
increasing financial stability of local partner organizations, where local partners will be better 
equipped to reduce future risks and instead demonstrate greater influence and impact. For 
instance, the Awardee to this NOFO is expected to be familiarized with Pre-Award Surveys 


NOFO 72051421RFA00002 STRENTENING TOGETHER ACTIVITY 

(NUPAS)10 written to each of USAID/Colombia’s local partners. Pre-Award Surveys are 
performed to all non-U.S. organizations and have three objectives11. These reports normally 
include assessing the adequacy of the local partner’s accounting system and their financial 
capability to perform under a prospective award, organizational structure, organizational legal 
framework, procurement procedures, HR policies, etc. Pre-Award Surveys will be a useful 
tool for the NOFO Awardee. 

Depending on the results of the Pre-Award Surveys, the Activity will address organizational 
capacity building issues and facilitate good governance. This may include, (1) development of 
policies and procedures manuals, (2) reforming the organization structure to improve 
segregation of duties, (3) development of internal control procedures, (4) improving human 
resource processes and capacity, (5) strengthening financial and accounting systems, (6) 
improving procurement systems, etc. Thus, from the start of the Activity, it is recommended 
that the Awardee(s) create a strong and trustworthy rapport with the local partners and explain 
their role and plan forward. Establishing strong relationships based on trust are key for the 
entire activity so the Activity will require partners to incorporate site visits and maintain robust 
and ongoing engagement with partners. Promoting opportunities to accompany as well as build 
connections between organizations as appropriate in ways where they can help one another. 
Lastly, USAID prefers that the Awardee consider hiring experts familiar with the U.S. 
Government and USAID regulations to respond to such recommendations. 

As mentioned earlier in the document, COVID has demonstrated the importance of adaptation, 
flexibility, and digital connectivity. The Activity will work on providing one-on-one tailored 
organizational plans for each local partner and adapt to the digital environment to build skills, 
knowledge and tools fostering organizational improvement. Thus, local partners will be 
equipped with the necessary organizational, strategic, and sustainable knowledge to influence 
and improve their organizational capacity. Local partners will be able to access and apply to 
Growth Incentive Grants by identifying specific areas for improvement of performance in a 
way that strengthens their organizational goals and strategies. Moreover, the Activity will 
provide expertise, know-how, and practical tools to respond to their organizational plans and 
will also provide opportunities to learn from international and U.S. best practices. At the end, 
local partners will be better equipped to reduce future risks and instead demonstrate greater 
influence and impact. 

Proposed Performance Monitoring and Review Measures for the Objective: 
The following are proposed performance measures for the life of the five-year Activity: 

• 
At a minimum, fifteen (15) Local Partners demonstrate improved performance. 
• 
At a minimum, fifteen (15) Growth Incentive Grants are awarded to local partners. 
• 
At a minimum, ten (10) Challenge Grants awarded to local organizations. 
10 Pre-Award Survey (NUPAS) is a thorough evaluation of a prospective US government funding recipient in order 
to assess the capacity to manage USAID funds and the likelihood for compliance with U.S. federal government 
regulations.
11 Pre-Award Survey (NUPAS) main objectives: 1) to determine whether the non-U.S. organization has sufficient 
financial and managerial capacity to manage USAID funds in accordance with the U.S. Government and USAID 
requirements; 2) to determine the most appropriate method of financing to use under the potential USAID award; 
and 3) to determine the degree of support and oversight necessary to ensure proper accountability of funds provided 
to the non-U.S. organization. 


A.5.2. OBJECTIVE 2: Internalize a Collaboration, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) 
approach 

 

The second objective of the Activity looks to internalize and strengthen the collaborating, 
learning and adapting (CLA) approach. Experience has shown that USAID/Colombia’s 
local partner organizations need to strengthen their monitoring, evaluation, and learning 
processes to effectively improve development impact and outcomes. The Activity is 
expected to incorporate Objective 2 in each local partner capacity and performance 
building work plan. As not all local partners are homogeneous, tailored approaches will 
be recommended based on the complexity of the needs. Intermediate results under this 
objective include improving monitoring, evaluation, and learning processes and using 
innovative analytical approaches in their day-to-day operations. In addition, under this 
Activity it is expected to support and create learning opportunities such as participating in 
in-country and international conferences, peer-to-peer training, and short-term training that 
create further CLA knowledge. 

 

A strong emphasis should be placed in improving a tailored CLA approach for local 
partners. Here the Awardee should consider promoting a learning and collaboration 
agenda, virtual and one-on-one meetings to identify CLA organizational needs. 
Importantly, the learning to be done under this Activity will require the buy-in of diverse 
local stakeholders and experts, if it is to be influential for how the program partners 
collectively adapt their behaviors and approaches. 

 

Proposed Performance Monitoring and Review Measures for the Objective: 

The following are proposed performance measures for the life of the five-year Activity: 

 

• At a minimum, ten (10) local partners improve their monitoring, evaluation, and 
learning processes. 


 

A.5.3. OBJECTIVE 3: Improved communications, messaging and outreach. 

 

The third objective of the Activity looks to improve communications, messaging and 
outreach. Like Objective 2, this objective is an identified need from all of 
USAID/Colombia’s local partners. Improving communications and outreach for increased 
engagement is key for organizations working on issues of critical importance and where the 
audience is sometimes apathetic and cynical. To succeed, local partners face the challenge 
of educating, motivating and mobilizing strategic audiences to their cause, work, and calls 
to action. Good communication often involves sending the right message, selecting the 
most appropriate medium, identifying one's audience in order to build trust and spur action. 
Here the Awardee is expected to work with the local partners to improve their individual 
Communications and Outreach Plans, among other sub-activities mentioned above. 
Intermediate results under this objective include more effective outreach to relevant 
audiences and connecting with national and international organizations to expand their 
advocacy, influence and impact. 

 

With the Activity’s support, local partners will improve their strategic communications, 
increase advocacy, and engagement to specific stakeholders. Strengthening their ability to 
tell stories about their achieved impact and advocacy in country and internationally. In 
addition, under this Activity it is expected to support and create learning opportunities such 


as participating in in-country and international conferences, peer-to-peer opportunities, and 
short-term training that create further improved messaging and outreach knowledge. 

 

Proposed Performance Monitoring and Review Measures for the Objective: 

The following are proposed performance measures for the life of the five-year Activity: 

 

● At a minimum, two study tours (site-visits) per year to foster networks and/or 
connections between local partners. 


 

A.5.4. OBJECTIVE 4: Colombian organizations effectively provide valued capacity 
building services. 

 

To effectively respond to the social market demands, as well as the needs of local partners, 
the Activity will strengthen two to three Colombian organizations to effectively provide 
capacity building goods and services, during and after the Activity’s period of 
performance. Thus, the fourth objective of the Activity looks to effectively provide 
capacity building services by Colombian organizations. In addition to supporting 
Colombian organizations in developing and improving their organizational capacity 
services, the Activity will incorporate a long-term sustainability strategy from its first year 
of implementation. As stated in ADS 201.3.1.2C, long-term sustainability and local 
ownership strengthen the capacity of local systems to produce development outcomes at 
the regional, national, sub-national, or community levels. To support Colombia’s journey 
to self-reliance, the Activity will identify, strengthen, and position two to three Colombian 
organizations to lead capacity-building efforts and offer goods and services, by the end of 
the activity. The Colombian organizations will be selected by the Awardee from the current 
Colombian marketplace and Objective 4 should build upon achievements to date in this 
sector. Intermediate results under this objective include building on successes and lessons 
learned from the current marketplace led by Colombian organizations and Colombian 
organizations (including both nonprofits and for-profit organizations) positioned to and 
providing capacity-building services to a wider community by the end of the Activity. 

 

The Activity will work hand-in-hand with organizations that have already built a series of 
tools, methodologies, publications, materials produced, and digital/cyber security services 
over the past years. As mentioned in the previous background section, Colombia has a 
series of local organizations that have been providing capacity building services. However, 
there is an identified need to accelerate, scale and adapt the marketplace to expand their 
goods and services reach and profitability. This Activity will recognize that potential 
buyers of such goods and services do not have the same funding levels, especially 
grassroots organizations thus, goods and services will be provided to different tier 
organizations with different budgets. 

 

Lastly, the awardee will share lessons, methodologies, and tools via an online platform 
identified. The Awardee should explore with the selected Colombian organizations and 
USAID/Colombia, the possibility of using an existing public online knowledge sharing 
platform that will include existing studies, tools, and training materials, and even encourage 
submissions via the website. It will also link YouTube and newspaper interviews and 
success stories that highlight local partners stories. 

 

 


Proposed Performance Monitoring and Review Measures for the Objective: 

The following are proposed performance measures for the life of the five-year Activity: 

 

● One market assessment regarding perception of and rates of payment for Colombia 
capacity building services show improved valuation by Colombian organizations. It is 
recommended the market assessment be done by an external organization. 
● A long-term sustainability strategy developed in the first Annual Implementation Plan 
(AIP). 
● A capacity building online platform with tailored services for Colombian organizations. 
● An annual outreach strategy to promote the available capacity building services of 
Colombian social sector organizations to target local partners. 


 

A.6. GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS: 


 

The Activity should benefit USAID/Colombia’s local partners; the largest majority have their 
organization headquarters in Bogota and Medellin (see map below). Therefore, the Activity should 
contemplate organizing its implementation in response to the local partners headquarters and 
operations in the two prioritized cities: Bogota and Medellin. In addition, the Awardee should 
consider travel to other regions - including rural, remote, and conflict affected regions - where the 
local partners implement their activities to further develop its relationships and understand the 
local partners organizational capacity challenges. 

 

Map: Local Partners headquarters (updated January 13, 2021) 



Graphic 2 - Source: USAID/Colombia’s Local Partner Headquarters updated Jan 13, 2021. 


A.7. ILLUSTRATIVE INDICATORS 


 

Below illustrative indicators for each of the Activity’s objectives that will guide all programming 
under this Activity. 

 

A.7.1. Objective 1: Increased organizational capacity for improved performance. 




Illustrative Indicators: 

 

● Improved performance of supported organizations in both immediate delivery 
and longer-term sustainability. 
● Local partners demonstrate greater influence on selected outcomes related to 
their mission and organizational goals. 
● Local partners have skills to reduce future risks and demonstrate greater 
development impact. 


 

A.7.2. Objective 2: Internalize a Collaboration, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) 
approach. 




Illustrative Indicators: 

 

● Establishment of CLA-related structures (e.g., advisory board and/or learning 
circles). 
● Pivot logs reveal effective use of learning to adjust programming. 
● Strengthened partners demonstrate improved performance in networking, 
constituent engagement, learning and adapting. 


 

A.7.3. Objective 3: Improved communications, messaging and outreach. 




Illustrative Indicators: 

 

● Improved outreach of partners (network map) 
● Peer organizations’ survey responses regarding value of target partners 


 

A.7.4. Objective 4: Colombian organizations effectively provide valued capacity 
building services. 




Illustrative Indicators: 

 

● A stronger and more comprehensive Colombian capacity services market where 
goods and services are provided to the larger social sector. 
● Self-reporting from Colombian providers regarding integration into 
international networks 


 

A.8. GUIDING PRINCIPLES 


 

The guiding principles below reflect important tenets of USAID’s commitment to assisting partner 
countries on their journey to self-reliance and will guide all programming under this Activity. 

 

1. Adaptability: This Activity will be adaptively managed by tailoring approaches to each of 
USAID’s local partners. This is necessary given the partners’ diverse sizes, capacities, 















NOFO 72051421RFA00002 STRENTENING TOGETHER ACTIVITY 

locations, and specialties. Moreover, the Activity will include double-loop learning12 to 
continuously apply lessons-learned and adjust to changing circumstances. The Activity 
will last three years with an option to extend it an additional two years, depending on the 
Activity’s success. 

2. Local partners approach: The focus on a local systems approach is rooted in the reality that 
achieving and sustaining any development outcome depends on the contributions of 
multiple and interconnected actors. Building the capacity of a single actor or strengthening 
a single relationship is insufficient. Rather, the focus should be on the system as a whole: 
the actors, their interrelationships and the incentives that guide them. Since Colombia is a 
complex, multi-dimensional, and fluid operating environment, it will be critical to analyze 
and plan all interventions based on a deep understanding of the various components of the 
systems in which they will work, as well as how they interact, impact each other, and 
produce effects. 
3. Foster a culture of knowledge sharing, performance monitoring, and adaptation: A key 
feature of Activity is a learning-by-doing approach. The Awardee should introduce and 
utilize harmonized procedures and tools to regularly review and adapt to project progress 
and challenges. 
4. Sustainability: The Awardee should present a clear sustainability strategy during the entire 
implementation. Sustainability will be viewed as the likelihood of long-term success of 
the alliance, which ultimately requires advancing private sector business growth and 
economic opportunities and/or corporate social responsibility; having local ownership; 
leveraging local resources and expertise; and increasing the ongoing achievement of 
significant and enduring development results over time. 
5. Facilitation: This approach aims to stimulate systemic change without taking a direct role 
in the system and reinforces the sustainability of these outcomes. It involves working 
through sets of local actors and participants to ensure that they are drivers of organizational 
change, and foster joint leadership in how activities are planned, conducted, and adapted. 
6. Digital Transformation: The Awardee should consider how technology can be leveraged 
safely and securely to deepen the Activity’s impact, sustainability, and scalability. The 
Awardee should prioritize sub-activities that use new or existing technologies, train local 
partners in digital technology, and/or develop new opportunities through technology. 
A.9. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
A.9.1. Inception Phase: 
A critical initial phase (first six months) of the Activity will be the inception phase to first 
analyze and understand the nature of the problem to be addressed, identify existing initiatives 

12 Double-loop learning is a continuous learning while implementing the strategy of the Activity is implemented, by 
analyzing closely the results and assumptions, and feeding those back to adapt its implementation. 
Double-loop learning is an educational concept and process that involves teaching people to think more deeply 
about their own assumptions and beliefs. It was created by Chris Argyris, a leading organizational trainer, in the 
mid-1980's, and developed over the next decade into an effective tool. 


and organizations providing capacity building services, and where the Activity might best 
intervene to achieve the purpose. Further interventions will be informed by the findings of the 
inception phase, including any studies, and pilots carried out. The Awardee is expected to plan 
with USAID and key stakeholders in order to engage appropriate resources in the design, scale 
and sequence of this Activity. This will allow the Activity to create maximum impact, while 
employing an iterative and adaptive approach. In this sense, the illustrative actions listed 
below are only to be regarded as tentative illustrations as opposed to guidance from USAID 
for required elements of a proposal. 

 

1. Identify and propose a Spanish Activity Name. Although the Activity has been given the 
English name of “Strengthening Together Activity” by USAID/Colombia, the Activity’s 
official name in Spanish will be proposed by the Awardee. 


 

2. Identify and analyze existing initiatives and institutions (public, private, informal, ongoing 
USG and non-USG projects, beneficiary groups of other interventions) that could be 
utilized or supported to successfully achieve the Activity’s goals and objectives. 


 

3. Identify potential Colombian organizations to lead capacity-building efforts during and 
once the Activity ends (Objective 4). 


 

4. Gather baseline information, including reviewing individuals Pre-Award Surveys from all 
USAID/Colombia’s local partners. 


 

5. Establish information systems and adaptive management mechanisms. 


 

Achieving the Activity’s outcomes will be a process of problem-driven, iterative adaptation. 
Based on the inception phase, the Awardee should identify strategic entry points for 
engagement and begin testing its initial approaches in an agile manner that builds in explicit 
processes of iterative design and adaptation. Findings from the inception period will be shared 
with USAID. The recipient and the AOR will jointly define the format and timing of this 
presentation. 

 

After the Inception Period, the Awardee will draft a second six-month work plan with 
programmatic targets, results metrics, and key assumptions. Programmatic priorities will be 
jointly agreed in consultation with the USAID AOR. Within the bounds of this agreed-upon 
framework, the Awardee will be expected to identify unanticipated targets of opportunity, as 
well as defining their plans for risk management and for learning and adapting throughout 
implementation. 

 

A.9.2. Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA): 




 

The Awardee is expected to contribute to USAID/Colombia’s commitment to a multifaceted 
CLA approach to development. The CLA approach is based on the understanding that 
development efforts yield more effective results if they are coordinated and collaborative; test 
promising, new approaches in a continuous yet also rapid, targeted search for generating 
improvements and efficiencies; and build on what works and eliminate what does not. It is 
also understood that CLA takes into account programmatic learning and shifts generated by 
the Activity (outward generating) as well as those adopted from external learning sources. 

 


USAID also anticipates that a strong focus on adaptive management techniques as expressed 
through staffing skills, structure, culture, business processes, and stakeholder engagement will 
be particularly important in the implementation of this activity. Adaptive management will 
allow partners to track and adjust to the opportunities to operationally integrate with other 
activities working in related efforts. Thus, USAID anticipates a CLA approach that tailors 
CLA to the needs and opportunities of this activity, while leaving open options for future 
evolution in its interpretation and application. 

 

● Collaborating: Engage in active collaboration with other key in-country partners to 
share knowledge around assessments, emerging research, lessons learned, and 
evaluations, and jointly develop action plans for integrating learning resulting from 
these activities into improved program implementation. 
● Learning: Hold annual learning summits to identify promising practices, work 
collaboratively to overcome implementation obstacles, and address changing 
conditions. Results should be used to inform upcoming year work plans and activity 
design across multiple stakeholders and captured and shared broadly. Specifically 
define how innovative and dynamic learning agendas will be developed and 
implemented with the teams and the Mission as a whole. Identify learning questions 
to guide the gathering of information to better understand or challenge key 
programmatic assumptions. 
● Adapting: Engage in periodic reflection activities using approaches such as afteraction 
reviews to identify, capture, and act upon lessons learned in technical, crosscutting, 
and management activities. The awardee/offeror will demonstrate adaptability 
that is informed by knowledge gained through learning and recognize behaviors and 
incentives necessary to create change. Knowledge gained through learning will 
influence decision making, resource allocation, and adaptation to contextual shifts. 


 

Application of new knowledge to implementation decisions will be reflected in the semiannual 
work plan, and the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (Activity MEL 
Plan). 

 

A.9.3. Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL): 




 

The successful Awardee should have an approved Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning Plan (AMELP). Key components of an Activity MEL Plan include: 

 

● The Activity’s monitoring approach, including relevant performance indicators of 
Activity with outputs and outcomes. 
● Proposed results based and/or impact evaluations, including any relevant preliminary 
evaluation questions. 
● The Activity’s learning approach that will include processes and actions designed to: 
(1) identify and fill knowledge gaps through research, knowledge sharing, and outside 
technical assistance and training; (2) facilitate learning from assessments, evaluations 
and periodic monitoring and reflection processes; and (3) build sustained knowledge 
sharing, across activities, partners, and sectors, and with key stakeholders from the 
USAID Mission, partner country government, and other donor funded activities 
through networking and collaboration; 
● Learning actions, including pause-and-reflect exercises, exchanges with other project 
activities, field visits, and knowledge capture at activity closeout and life-of-activity 



summary report. Learning actions are expected to engage and be useful not only to 
USAID, but to involve and inform activity beneficiaries. 
● Estimated resources for these monitoring, evaluation, and learning actions that are a 
part of the implementing partner’s budget; and Roles and responsibilities for all 
proposed monitoring, evaluation, and learning actions. The MEL Plan should be 
revised as needed over the life of the five-year Activity in response to changes in 
context, learning, updates to the theory of change, and so forth. 


 

A.9.4. Learning, Knowledge Management, and Communications 




 

USAID is a knowledge-driven organization that works on complex issues in ever-changing 
environments. Having access to the right information at the right time is critical for USAID’s 
success. Knowledge Management (KM) throughout the Activity will ensure that lessons 
learned are generated, captured, shared, and applied systematically and strategically so there 
is continuous learning, effective engagement, and organizational improvement. Effective KM 
in this Activity will also help to stimulate innovative ideas, capitalize on effective practices, 
foster better decision-making, and build a more informed workforce. Moreover, the Activity 
will champion experimentation, innovation, and research. 

 

All of the above will be key if USAID/Colombia decides to scale-up this intervention. For 
this Activity, KM will require effective coordination and complementarity between the 
AMELP and the Communications and Outreach Plan. 

 

A.10. SUB-GRANTS: 


 

This Activity is expected to provide technical assistance, in-kind and cash grants that support the 
four Objectives detailed above. There will be two types of modalities for sub-grants: (1) Growth 
Incentive Grants and (2) Challenge Grants. Grants can be awarded both in-kind and cash. The 
Activity expects a total of USD $3,000,000 million for both Growth Incentive and Challenge 
Grants mechanisms to motivate active participation, engagement, strengthening, adaptation and 
learning. 

 

A.10.1. Growth Incentive Grants: 




 

As mentioned earlier in the Theory of Change section, the Activity assumes targeted 
organizations are open to receiving USAID assistance and local capacity building resources 
to improve their own organizational performance. However, USAID experience shows that 
capacity building can require cultural, behavioral, and organizational changes and that not all 
organizations are interested in participating from the start. Therefore, the Activity includes a 
total of USD $1,500,000 Growth Incentive Grants mechanism to motivate active participation 
among local partners. The Activity should include support to local partners through the 
elaboration of their work plans and incentive grants proposals, including the possibility of 
matching funds toward accomplishment of work plans, if that is appropriate. The Activity will 
include innovative ways to use this mechanism to incentivize desired behaviors in ways that 
are sustainable and foster meaningful local ownership. 

 

Growth Incentive Grants can provide a necessary nudge for local partners to seize 
opportunities that further Objectives 1-3 of the Activity, but the main pull should come from 
the organization themselves. The Awardee will set aside the majority of incentive grants for 


local partners specifically identified for Objective 1. In addition, the Awardee will work with 
local partners to identify incentives needed to pilot sub-activities applicable to specific 
partners’ priorities identified on Objectives 1 - 3. Evidence has shown that local partners are 
sometimes reluctant to carry out large scale and cultural changes in their organizations due to 
bandwidth and required time commitments however, to incentivize positive behavior change, 
strategic exposure to peer success and peer-to-peer learning is key. Local partners identified 
from Objective 1 will apply to the Growth Incentive Grants. The Awardee must propose 
selection criteria to support the Objectives 1-3. 

 

A.10.2. Challenge Grants: 




 

In addition to the Growth Incentive Grants, the Activity will include Challenge Grants. 
Challenge grants are designed to test, improve, and scale innovations in services, 
methodologies, and technologies with the potential to further Objectives 1-4. While this 
activity is primarily intended to benefit USAID’s current local partners, this type of grant is 
open to all local organizations in Colombia (e.g., grassroots, civil society, think tanks, and 
community organizations, among others). The Awardee is encouraged to seek out and propose 
new and other local organizations as well in coordination with the USAID/Colombia’s AOR. 
It is encouraged that the Awardee consider issuing an Annual Program Statement (APS) to 
encourage innovative ideas that strengthen organizational performance. Challenge grants are 
expected to be launched and used in Years 1, 2, and 3. The Activity includes a total of USD 
$1,500,000 Challenge Grants mechanism to motivate active participation among partners. In 
addition, successful challenge grants will be used as peer-to-peer learnings. Challenge grants 
will range from USD $20,000 to $500,000 during the period of performance of the Activity. 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1. ESTIMATE OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 


 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement renewal award pursuant to this NOFO 
for a base period of performance of three (3) years with two (2) possible renewal award periods of 
one (1) year each. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID 
intends to provide up to $15,00,000.000 million in total USAID funding over the initial three-year 
period. Not later than ninety (90) days from the end of this initial period of performance of the 
award, the recipient must submit their application, which must include a new SF-124 and 
certifications, assurances, representations, and other statements per ADS 303.3.8, with the request 
for a one-year renewal period for an additional $4,000,000. This same is required for the possible 
fifth year of performance. USAID reserves the right to fund any one or none of the applications 
submitted. 

 

B.2. START DATE AND PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE FOR FEDERAL AWARDS 


 

The initial period of performance is three (3) years, with an additional two, one-year renewal 
periods possible for a possible total period of performance of five (5) years, subject to availability 
of funds, satisfactory progress towards meeting the award’s objectives as described in the program 
description in Section A, submission of required reports, and compliance with the terms and 
conditions of the award, including the conditions for renewal. 

 

B.3. SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 


 

USAID/Colombia anticipates having substantial involvement throughout the implementation of 
this cooperative agreement in accordance with ADS 303.3.11. The specific areas of USAID 
involvement includes: 

 

B.3.1 Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plans: The Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR) will approve the Recipient's annual implementation plans 
(AIP) and any subsequent changes to the plans due to shifting context, new 
information, security conditions, etc. The AOR will participate in strategic 
planning sessions for the development of AIPs. The AOR must review the 
agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure inadvertent changes to them are not 
approved through the AIP. 

 

B.3.2 Approval of Key Personnel and Any Changes in Key Personnel: Key personnel 
are those individuals considered to be essential to the successful implementation 
of the award. USAID will be consulted early in the process of any proposed 
changes in key personnel following award, and the AO will approve the selection 
with the AOR’s technical concurrence. Key personnel identified for this award are 
the Chief of Party (COP), Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP), Technical Senior 
Specialist for Component 4, and Grants Manager. 

 

B.3.3 Agency and Recipient Collaboration and Joint Participation: The Agency and 
Recipient engagement in collaboration and joint participation may occur when the 
Recipient’s successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 


USAID’s technical knowledge. USAID anticipates collaboration and joint 
participation during the inception phase and co-creation throughout award 
implementation. Additional areas and spaces for joint participation and 
collaboration may be identified throughout the life of the five-year Activity. 
Additionally, if the Activity establishes an advisory committee that provides 
advice to the Recipient, USAID may participate as a member of this committee as 
well. Advisory committees will only deal with programmatic or technical issues, 
and not routine administrative matters. 

 

B.3.4 Approval of all sub-awards and sub-award manual: 2 CFR 200.308 requires 
the Recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the subaward, transfer or 
contracting out of any work under the agreement. USAID will also approve the 
sub-award manual. Subawards included in the final revised application and budget 
are considered approved unless otherwise noted. 

 

B.3.5 Ability to immediately halt an activity if the recipient does not meet detailed 
performance specifications (for example, construction specifications): These 
would-be provisions that go beyond the suspension remedies of the Federal 
Government for noncompliance as stated in 2 CFR 200, including nonperformance. 
The award must state that the AO may immediately halt an activity 
when identified specifications are not met. The award must include the identified 
specifications when executed. The AO and Recipient must sign a bilateral 
amendment for any material changes to the specifications in the award. 

 

B.3.6 Approval of one stage of work: The Agency’s review and approval of one stage 
of work, before work can begin on a subsequent stage during the period covered 
by the cooperative agreement. This includes the Inception Phase detailed in 
Section A. Additional stages may be identified depending on the technical 
approach of the apparently successful Applicant and included in this section prior 
to award. 

 

B.3.7 Approval of print or electronic publications: The AOR will review with the 
Development Outreach & Communications (DOC) Specialist and approve final 
versions of all printed and/or electronic publications before these are released to 
ensure compliance with approved Activity specifications. 

 

B.3.8 Approval for direction or redirection: The AOR will authorize specific kinds of 
direction or redirection because of interrelationships with other Activities 
sponsored by the U.S. Government or other donors and to ensure coordination and 
complementarity, avoid duplication of efforts, and/or support U.S. foreign policy 
considerations. All such direction or redirection must be within the program 
description, budget, and other terms and conditions of the award. 

 

B.4. AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 


 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937. 
Code 937 is defined as the United States, Colombia (Recipient country), and developing countries 
other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. 

 


B.5. NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient under the subject program is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Strengthening Together 
Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award 
through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility 
for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program 
objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1. ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. U.S. and non-US organizations may participate. USAID 
welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial assistance 
from USAID. Public International Organizations are ineligible for this NOFO unless they consent 
to receiving a cooperative agreement governed by 2 CFR and applicable ADS 303 policies. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is required 
to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective Recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to 
obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the Activity and comply with the terms and 
conditions of the award. 

 

For-profit Applicants must note that USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit for 
Recipients under assistance instruments. Forgone profit does not qualify as cost-share or leverage. 
Extensive sub-grants or consortia with local organizations are encouraged in the Applicant’s 
program. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

C.2. COST SHARING OR MATCHING 


 

Cost sharing is required for the Applicant to be eligible. Applicants must propose a cost share of 
minimum 10%. Applicants that do not meet the minimum cost share requirement are not eligible 
for award consideration. 

 

Cost share refers to the resources a Recipient contributes to the total cost of an agreement. Cost 
share will become a condition of the resulting award and will be included in the approved award 
budget. Cost share may be audited and must be verifiable from the Recipient’s records. U.S. 
organizations are subject to the requirements of 2 CFR 200.306, and non-U.S. organizations are 
subject to the Standard Provision, “Cost Share.” Such funds may be provided directly by the 
recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation donors; host governments; and local 
organizations, communities and private businesses that contribute financially and in-kind to 
implementation of activities at the country level. This may include contribution of staff level of 
effort, office space or other facilities or equipment which may be used for the program, provided 
by the recipient. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1. AGENCY POINTS OF CONTACT 


 

Name: Heather Wirick 

Title: Agreement Officer 

Email: hwirick@usaid.gov 

 

Name: German Camilo Gutierrez 

Title: Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: ggutierrez@usaid.gov 

 

D.2. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO must be submitted via email to the points of contact listed above 
no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter. Any information given to a prospective 
Applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as 
an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the 
lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

D.3. GENERAL CONTENT AND FORM OF THE CONCEPT PAPER, FULL 
APPLICATIONS AND ORAL PRESENTATIONS 


 

The Government intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement renewal award. The 
Strengthening Together Activity (STA) assistance selection is being conducted in accordance with 
2 CFR 200, 2 CFR 700 and ADS Chapter 303 through the use of a multi-tiered review process 
consisting of the following phases: 

 

D.3.1 Phase 1 - Concept Paper: Applicants will submit concept papers that respond to 
the objectives outlined in this NOFO. USAID will then conduct a merit review of the 
concept papers in accordance with Section E below. The organizations submitting the most 
highly rated concept papers will be invited for the oral presentation phase. Applicants not 
advancing to the oral presentation phase will be notified accordingly. No budget or cost 
application will be accepted at this stage. Any questions/clarifications/foci-of-interest 
found in the concept papers of the highest-rated applicants will be included in the invitation 
letters and the invitees will be expected to address these during oral presentations. 

 

Costs associated with preparation of the concept paper are the sole responsibility of the 
applicant. 

 

D.3.2 Phase 2 - Oral Presentation: Applicants that successfully pass Phase 1 of the 
Merit Review will be invited to participate in the oral presentation phase, which will be 
done via Video Teleconferencing (VTC) through Google Meets and will be recorded. The 
proposed Chief of Party must lead the presentation and the proposed Key Personnel are 
encouraged to be present and to participate. The maximum number of participants from 
each organization that can attend is five (5). Applicants that are invited to Phase 2 must 
submit at most three (3) history of performance forms filled out by COB local time seven 
(7) calendar days after receipt of the invitation. See attachment #5. History of performance 
information must be within the last five (5) years. Invitees to Phase 2 must also submit Key 


Personnel information no later than two (2) days prior to their oral presentation date. See 
below for more information. Oral Presentations will be held not less than three (3) weeks 
from the receipt of the invitation and the specific date and time will be noted on the 
invitation. 

 

USAID will review each oral presentation against the merit criteria as defined in the 
NOFO. There will be only one presentation per applicant/per day followed by a questionsand-
answers session. The oral presentation must not exceed two (2) hours with no more 
than one (1) hour for questions and answers, including addressing any questions or 
weaknesses as specified in the invitation letter. 

 

Applicants not selected from the oral presentation phase will be notified. Costs associated 
with participation in the oral presentation phase are the sole responsibility of the applicant. 

 

D.3.3 Phase 3 - Final Application Development: Following the oral presentation phase, 
the apparently successful Applicant will draft an Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning Plan (AMELP), Branding and Marking Plan, and a Cost Application with a 
detailed budget and budget narrative. Costs associated with the Final Application 
Development are the sole responsibility of the applicant. Final application materials will 
be due not less than two (2) weeks from successful applicant notification. 

 

The application must be prepared according to the structural format set forth below. 

 

D.4. APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 


 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. All application files submitted 
must be compatible with Microsoft (MS) Office in a MS Windows environment and/or Adobe 
Acrobat (.pdf). The subject of each e-mail must read as follows: (a) 72051421RFA00002 - 
“Strengthening Together Activity” submitted by: (organization name). The same email “Subject” 
formatting must be used for any subsequent submissions of information as an Applicant advances 
through the phased competitive process. Applicants must sign the application and print or type 
their name on the Cover Page of the concept paper and subsequent cost application, as applicable. 
Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initiated by the person signing the 
application. Applications shall be submitted via email of a single concept paper as described 
below. All concept papers received by the deadline stated in the NOFO will be reviewed for 
responsiveness to the specifications outlined in these guidelines and the application format. Late 
or incomplete applications will not be considered. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to ensure that 
all necessary documentation is complete and received on time. Applications must be sent to 
German Gutierrez at ggutierrez@usaid.gov with a copy to Heather Wirick at hwirick@usaid.gov. 

 

Applicants must compile and submit the concept note, and all supporting documents as a single 
email attachment, e.g., that you consolidate the various parts of an application into a single 
document before sending them. No addition or modifications will be accepted after the submission 
date. 

 

After you have sent your applications electronically, immediately check your own email to confirm 
that the attachments you intended to send were indeed sent. If you discover an error in your 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same 


email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" 
email. 

 

a) All documents including the Concept Paper should be in English, with one-inch (2.54 cm) 
margins on all sides, in a single column. 
b) Use Times New Roman font (12-point font or larger); figures and tables may feature 
different fonts in smaller font sizes (e.g., Arial, 10 points) but must be easily readable. 
c) The line spacing on the concept paper should be “single.” 
d) The concept paper is limited to six (6) pages including graphics and charts, but excluding 
the cover page, table of contents, and list of acronyms. USAID/Colombia will not review 
the portion of the concept paper application that is over 6 pages and will not review 
unauthorized attachments. 
e) Insert page numbers on all pages. Avoid any excessively elaborate formatting/presentation 
to facilitate duplication and readability. 


 

The Concept Paper shall include the following sections in addition to the main documentation. 

These sections will not be included in the page count. 

 

D.4.1 Cover Page: The cover page is limited to one (1) page and must include the 
following: 

 

i. Concise title of activity; 
ii. NOFO Number; 
iii. Name and address of the Applicant organization; 
iv. Type of organization (e.g., for-profit, non-profit, university, network, 
etc.); 
v. DUNS Number; 
vi. Contact point (name, telephone, and e-mail); and 
vii. Names of proposed sub-recipients or partnerships. 


 

D.4.2 Table of contents: This should follow the concept paper format outlined 
herein. This will not be part of the evaluation. 

 

D.4.3 List of acronyms: Any acronym used in the concept paper should be included 
in this list. 

 

Note: Although no cost or budget related documentation is required of any applicant 
in the concept paper, any proposed concept should be mindful of budgetary 
limitations. 

 

D.5. PHASE 1 - CONTENT OF INITIAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 


 

Concept Paper: Applicants will submit concept papers that respond to the objectives outlined in 
this NOFO. It should demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 
achieving the goals of this program. Concept papers must be specific, complete and concise. The 
Applicant must articulate a technical approach to achieving the results that not only reflects 
technical knowledge and innovation but is also responsive to all of the Activity’s technical 
objectives and requirements. The Concept Paper must reflect a thorough understanding of the 
current context of capacity building and in Colombia. The feasibility of the technical approach and 


strategies proposed to achieve the Activity’s results over the life of the five-year activity must be 
justified. 

 

Concept papers must outline how the Applicant will achieve the following: 

 

a) A realistic description of how the vision, objectives, and results as stated in Section A will 
be achieved. The approach must be feasible within the situational and temporal context and 
proposes a long-term sustainability approach to the Activity. 
b) Proposal of specific activity objectives and sub-activities to achieve the expected results. 
The concept should reflect technical knowledge, innovation, and demonstrates an efficient 
timeline to boost local organizational capacity. 
c) A well-thought-out description of use of any partner organizations and/or partnerships to 
achieve the Activity’s expected results. 


 

D.6. PHASE 2 - ORAL PRESENTATION FORMAT 


 

Based on USAID’s evaluation of the Concept Papers, the Applicants with the Concept Paper 
submissions most likely to achieve the objectives, as described in Section A, will be invited to 
participate in oral presentations. 

 

A PowerPoint slide-deck used during the oral presentations and all materials submitted prior to the 
oral presentation will become an official part of the source selection file and may be used for 
references purposes during evaluation. The History of Performance information must be submitted 
within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the invitation to participate in Phase 2. The initial 
slide-deck and Key Personnel information (see below for more information) must be provided to 
the Agreement Officer two (2) days prior to the oral presentation as stated on the invitation 
letter. Please see instructions above for email format. 

 

In addition to responding to the key issues, the presentation must address the following critical 
areas: 

D.6.1 Technical Approach 

 

In addition to addressing any questions/weaknesses clarifications/foci-of-interest 
communicated in the invitation letter, the presentation should expand upon the concept 
paper in terms of addressing the following outcomes: 

 

i. Outcome 1: Provide a clear and succinct overview of the Applicant’s proposed 
plan for achieving the outlined objectives and results; and propose a sustainability 
approach to the Activity. 
ii. Outcome 2: Display coordination, integration, and complementarity among all its 
components. Including demonstrating a strong understanding of the Sub-Grants 
component of the Activity and demonstrating a clear methodology that 
incorporates the Activity’s guiding principles and Collaborate, Learning, and 
Adapting (CLA) methodology. 
iii. Outcome 3: Include a discussion of the rationale for proposing partnerships and 
sub-recipients, the potential for facilitating funds from government, nongovernmental 
entities and the private sector. 


















 

 


D.6.2 Management Approach/Staffing Plan 

 

The Management Approach portion of the oral presentation must follow the following 
guidelines and requirements: 

 

a) Management Approach and Staffing Plan Overview 


 

The final management approach and staffing plan overview must briefly 
include/explain the following points: 

 

1. Management Implementation: The Applicant must present an overall plan for 
the management and implementation of the Activity and must describe a 
sound organizational structure and provide for rapid startup responding to the 
Inception Phase (Section A). 
2. Key Personnel: The Applicant must propose individuals as key personnel who 
have qualifications that align with the described roles and responsibilities of 
the position and must say whether these positions will be filled by local staff. 
3. Sub-Grant Management: If partners and/or sub-recipients will be proposed, 
this section must also briefly address uses of the sub-partners, including their 
contributions to the Activity’s objectives. The Applicant must describe its 
management approach for building capacity of multiple local organizations 
while managing the grants component of the Activity. 
4. Local staffing: The Applicant should make use of local specialists to the 
greatest extent possible. The Applicant must demonstrate how building local 
capacity are essential elements of this Activity and in the broad objectives of 
human and institutional capacity development must be integrated into all 
program areas. Any staffing plan must include base elements to address these 
concerns. 


 

b) Key Personnel 

 

The Key positions are critical for a successful implementation of this activity. 
They are subject to approval by the USAID Agreement Officer. Key Personnel 
positions include: 

 

1. Chief of Party (COP) will provide high quality technical and strategic 
leadership, managerial oversight, and administration of the project. S/he 
description will be the primary point of contact with USAID/Colombia. 
Provides overall guidance and supervision of the day-to-day implementation of 
the Activity and agreement. At least 10 years of international or Colombia 
experience in working on organizational capacity issues. Experience working 
in a post-conflict area would be an advantage. Minimum bachelor’s degree in 
social science or related field. Fluent in Spanish and English is required. 


 

2. Deputy Chief of Party will be the Primary point of contact with 
USAID/Colombia in absence of the Chief of Party with regard to day-to-day 
implementation and management matters related to the agreement. S/he will 
have at least seven (7) years of experience in working on development in 
Colombia, as well as relevant technical experience in alliance building and 



donor-funded or private sector development projects. Previous experience 
implementing international cooperation activities, management staff, and 
working with local partners. Minimum bachelor’s degree in social science or 
related field. Fluency in English is preferred. 


 

3. Technical Senior Specialist for Component 4 will provide intellectual and 
operational leadership over Component 4, support the teams and selected 
partners to ensure that all Activity deliverables are on time, within budget, and 
meet or exceed program targets. S/he will have a minimum of seven (7) years 
of work experience in the organizational, strategic, administrative/financial 
capacity building context, including experience working with local partner 
issues. Minimum bachelor’s degree in social science or related field. Fluency 
in English is preferred. 


 

4. Grants Manager will be responsible for all sub-awards under the project. 
Maintain communication with all sub-awardees to ensure timely receipt of 
federally required reports and documentation in accordance with federal 
regulations and the terms and conditions of multiple grant awards. S/he 
facilitates, submits, negotiates, and manages grant agreements; develops and 
implements compliance measures; and drafts and manages sub-recipient 
awards. S/he will have a minimum of seven (7) years of experience in federal 
grant management and at least four (4) of which these years include knowledge 
of USG grant regulations. Specific knowledge of USAID Rules and 
Regulations over Grants and Cooperative Agreements is highly desirable. 
Minimum of a bachelor’s degree in Accounting or related field. Fluency in 
English is preferred. 


 

The Applicant must provide resumes of Key Personnel (no longer than three [3] pages each) and 
Letters of Commitment for Key Personnel two (2) days prior to the oral presentation date as 
specified in the invitation letter. 

 

D.6.3 Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP) 

 

The PowerPoint presentation must include a brief Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning Plan (AMELP). The AMELP should include an explanation of the development 
hypothesis, a results framework that builds on the one contained in this NOFO, and a listing 
of key proposed indicators. It should also include information on baseline data collection, 
illustrative targets for each major indicator, concise performance indicator reference sheets, 
and sustainability. 

 

D.6.4 History of Performance Review (if applicable) 

 

The Applicant must also identify the three (3) most similar or related activities completed 
during the past five (5) years for themselves as well as the significant proposed 
implementing sub-partners (if any) as well. “Significant” is defined as a sub-partner whose 
total estimated budget equals 10 percent or more of the Applicant’s total estimated amount. 
The Applicant must provide this information by completing Part I of the Applicant 
Performance Reports (provided in Section IX, Attachment 5) by the date as specified in 
the Oral Presentation Invitation Letter. 


USAID reserves the right to obtain performance information from other sources including 
those not named in the applications. 

 

D.6.5 Oral Presentation Schedule 

 

One Applicant will be evaluated per day in the morning (exact time to be determined). The 
Oral Presentation will be conducted via Google Meet and is expected to take up to two (2) 
hours for each Applicant with one (1) additional hour of questions and answers afterwards, 
including addressing any questions or weaknesses as identified in the invitation letter. The 
anticipated presentation agenda will be as follows: 

 

• Introductions – 10 minutes 
• PowerPoint Presentation – 110 minutes 
• Questions and Answers – 60 minutes 


 

Within the days following oral presentation the Agreement Officer will select the apparently 
successful Applicant and inform all Oral Presentation participants of the decision. 

 

D.7 PHASE 3 - FINAL TECHNICAL APPLICATION 

 

USAID will select one apparently successful applicant from the oral presentation. The apparently 
successful Applicant will be requested to submit a Cost Application with a detailed budget and 
budget narrative, as well as a draft Branding and Marking (B&M) Plan and draft Activity 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP). 

 

D.7.1 Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as 
concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) 
application must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown 
in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed 
necessary for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 
CFR 200.206. Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial 
application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated 
below this listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page 
b) SF 424 Form(s) 


 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard 
Forms can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 






Instructions for SF- 
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 





Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 





Instructions for SF- 
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 





Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 





Instructions for SF- 
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 





Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

D.7.2 Required Certifications and Assurances 

 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
cost application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance 
if your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 

 

D.7.3 Budget and Budget Narrative 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later 
versions) with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, 
including itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not 
contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the 
cost analysis time required to make award and may result in a rejection of the cost 
application. The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to 
understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any 
additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The 


Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s 
determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

• Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out 
by major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and 
any potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, 
Annex 1 for Summary Budget Template 
• Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement 
the applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found 
in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 
• Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken 
out by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, 
salary rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, 
when proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must 
explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate 
that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the services rendered and consistent 
with what is paid for similar work in other activities of the applicant. Applicants must 
provide their established written policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s 
written policies do not address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, 
the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 

 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by 
an agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence 
of its approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant 
must propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the 
Budget Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe 
benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. 
dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 

 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the 
applicant’s normal travel policies. When appropriate please provide supporting 
documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions 
in the Budget Narrative. 

 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property 
– Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the 
cost per unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the 
equipment and supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must 


support the necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: 
rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives 
available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 

 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through 
to any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier 
entity is a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same 
requirements as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect 
costs. 

 

8) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as 
report preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as 
well as any other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the 
applicant. The applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed 
conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along 
with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 

 

9) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or 
will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see 
Subpart E of 2 CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are 
requesting and provide the applicable supporting information. Below are the most 
commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs. 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 
Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by 
an Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. 
Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award 
subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit 
Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA Initial Application 
Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs but 
may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology 
once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non- 
Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may 
apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges 
indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 

 

 


Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non-U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but 
approval is at the discretion of the AO. Initial Application Requirements: Provide the 
proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that includes the following: 

 

• Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for 
the current year. Guidance to AO: If the indirect costs are expected to be minimal or 
easily attributed to performance of a USAID agreement, the AO should delete this 
first bullet. 
• Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, 
personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more 
than one program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and 
maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and 
estimates for the current year. 
• Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular 
cost to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% 
de minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request 
additional supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the 
application still be under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no 
obligation to approve the applicant’s requested method. 

 

10) Cost Sharing – The applicant must provide the required 10% in cost share. 
Applicants should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be provided over the 
life of the five-year agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis 
of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants must also provide a breakdown of the 
cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in 
implementing the resulting award. 

 

D.7.4 Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any 
requirements for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to 
reflect approval of any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically 
required for allowability, the applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 
200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

D.7.5 Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved 
at the time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the 
following: 

 

• Name of organization 



• DUNS Number 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security 
designation list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

D.7.6 Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all 
applicable unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management 
(SAM) requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal 
awarding agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or 
has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is 
required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining 
processes, eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and 
consolidating hosting to make the process of doing business with the government 
more efficient (www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under 
consideration by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may 
determine that the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that 
determination as a basis for making an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a 
Quick Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, 
navigate to Help, then to International Registrants. 

 


D.7.7 Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 
for assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 
Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and 
services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized 
geographic code specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and 
nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

D.7.8 Draft of the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 

 

Prior to a final Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan that must be 
completed within 60 days of the Award (with the submission of the first work plan) 
USAID requires a draft AMEL Plan. This draft should expand upon the simple 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning and Collaborate, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) 
approach given in the Oral Presentation. This document should include Performance 
Indicators for the first year. 

 

D.7.9 Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be required to submit a Branding Strategy and 
Marking (B&M) Plan to be reviewed and approved by the Agreement Officer prior to the 
award. 

All USAID-funded foreign assistance (including programs, projects, activities, public 
communications, or commodities) must be communicated, promoted, and marked as 
coming from the American people through USAID. Specific communications and 
promotion measures must be described in the “Branding Strategy” and “Branding 
Implementation Plan,” and specific marking will be described in the “Marking Plan” for 
this award. Branding and marking under this award must comply with the USAID 
Automated Directive System Chapter 320 Branding and Marking (ADS 320). 

 

ADS320 requires that, after the evaluation of the applications, the USAID Agreement 
Officer requests the Apparently Successful Applicant to submit a branding strategy and 
marking plan that describes how the activity is named and positioned, how it is promoted 
and communicated to beneficiaries and cooperating country citizens and identifies the 
donor and explains how they will be acknowledged. USAID will not competitively 
evaluate the proposed Branding Strategy. ADS 320 may be found at the following website: 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/320.pdf. 

 

In preparation of the branding strategy and the marking plan, the apparently successful 
Applicant will follow the guidance provided in this NFO. Additional guidance is available 
at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. The cost application must incorporate the estimated 
cost of the proposed branding strategy and marking plans implementation. 

 


The general format of the documents associated with this Final Application must follow 
the previously stated format above in Section D.5 with the exception of the page number 
limitation. 

 

D.8 PRE-AWARD PROVISIONS 

 

D.8.1 CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 


 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization 
or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved 
in the competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency 
official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which 
financial or other personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of 
compromising, the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 








 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after 
submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO 
no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 








 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 


 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they 
are aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in 
competing for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage 
include but are not limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee 
gained access to non-public information regarding a federal assistance funding 
opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the 
preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take 
appropriate action upon receiving any such notification from the applicant. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

D.8.2 BRANDING STRATEGY – ASSISTANCE (JUNE 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and 
how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 




 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers 
no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 




 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 




 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, 





in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated 
Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 




 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 




 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 
plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found on 
the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the NOFO 
or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity when 
acknowledging contributions. 

 

(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 

 

(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant 
must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 

(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity 
that competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 
consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed logos. 
Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an 
additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and 
so forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID 
is from the American People.” 

 


(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials 
and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly 
acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information 
is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's 
cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 




 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be 4 included in 
and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 




 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

D.8.3 MARKING PLAN – ASSISTANCE (JUNE 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and 
other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID 
logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is 
the official marking for the Agency and is found on the USAID Web site at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the NOFO or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 


 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 


 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 


 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, 
in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated 
Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 


 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 


 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 
the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 

 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature; 


 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, 
informational, media, or communications products funded by USAID; 

 

(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster 
relief programs; and 

 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 

 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID 
Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID 
and the support of the American people. 

 
(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID 
Identity; 

 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the 
program deliverables; 

 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program 
deliverables, and where the applicant will place the marking; 

 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 
Identity , and 

 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation 
of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 
marking requirements would: 

 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials 
where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and 
materials. The applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim 
Result, or program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an 
aspect of the award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable 
item, examples of material for which an exemption is sought. 

 

(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The 
applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

 


(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, 
public service announcements, or other communications. The applicant must 
explain why each particular item or product is better positioned as host-country 
government item or product. 

 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking 
the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why 
marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 

 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms or be considered inappropriate. The 
applicant must identify the relevant norm and explain why marking would violate 
that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 

 

(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and 
will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to 
ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated 
objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 


 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative 
agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 


 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1. CRITERIA 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants will note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants will address in their concept papers/applications/oral presentations, and (b) set the 
standard against which all concept paper/applications/oral presentations will be evaluated. 

 

E.2. REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 


 

This is a multi-tiered NOFO in accordance with Automated Directives System (ADS) 303.3.6.1(c). 
Review and selection under this NOFO will be based on a multi-step process: 

 

Phase 1 - Concept Paper submissions: open to all eligible organizations as described in 
this NOFO. 

 

Phase 2 - Oral Presentations: by invitation only to applicants selected under the Phase 1 
merit review. 

 

Phase 3 - Apparent Winner will be required to submit a budget and budget narrative, both 
of which must include cost share, and a draft Branding and Marking Plan and Activity 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan. Only the budget will be evaluated as part of 
the application process and the apparent winner may expect to receive feedback on draft 
plans to incorporate into the final versions that will be due after award. 

 

All Concept Papers will be evaluated according to the criteria specified in this NOFO. If the 
concept is determined to warrant further evaluation per the selection criteria established, USAID 
will request an Oral Presentation. 

 

In accordance with ADS 303.3.10.2 and 2 CFR 200.306, cost sharing cannot be used as a separate 
factor during the merit review of applications. However, cost sharing may be considered in the 
merit review only if the funding announcement specifically addresses how it will be considered. 
In this NOFO, cost sharing will be used to break ties among applications with equivalent scores 
after evaluation against all other factors. 

 

E.3. MERIT REVIEW 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed herein are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify significant matters which 
the Applicants must address in their Concept Papers during Phase 1 and applications during the 
Oral Presentation Phase 2 stage, and (b) set the standard against which all applications will be 
evaluated. These criteria are listed in descending importance: 

 

1. Technical Approach 
2. Management Approach 
3. History of Performance 


 

 


E.3.1 Merit Review Criteria for Phase 1 - Concept Paper 

 

Submissions are open to all eligible organizations as described in this NOFO. 

 

Concept Papers will be evaluated based on the extent to which the concept paper best 
addresses the objectives as stated in Section A of this NOFO. 

 

Once the submitted Concept Papers have been fully reviewed, the selected Applicant(s) 
will be notified by the Agreement Officer of whether they have been selected to move on 
to Phase 2 of the Merit Review. 

 

E.3.2 Merit Review Criteria for Phase 2 - Oral Presentations 

 

The oral presentation stage will be reviewed based on the following three (3) merit review 
criteria listed in descending order of importance: 

 

A. Technical Approach: 


 

1. Overall technical approach: The extent to which the Oral Presentations communicate a 
comprehensive understanding of the Activity objectives and presents the best approach 
for achieving all objectives. The extent to which the technical approach responds to 
local context and incorporates key local organizations for Objective 4, and so, presents 
a sustainability strategy after the Activity ends. Lastly, the extent to which the proposed 
approach incorporates the Guiding Principles as outlined in Section A. 
2. Sub-grants management: The extent to which the oral presentation participants 
demonstrate a strong understanding of the Sub-Grants component of the Activity. The 
extent to which the Applicant presents a detailed approach on how to use both grant 
mechanisms, Growth Incentive and Challenge Grants, during the life of the five-year 
Activity. 
3. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) and Collaboration, Learning and 
Adapting (CLA): The extent to which the oral presentation participants demonstrate a 
clear methodology that incorporates CLA and a logical approach for utilizing data to 
adaptively manage interventions. 


 

B. Management Approach: 


 

1. Management Implementation: The feasibility of the overall plan for the management 
and implementation of the Activity, including a sound organizational structure, and 
providing for rapid startup. 
2. Key Personnel: The extent to which the individuals proposed as key personnel have 
qualifications that meet or exceed the minimum requirements; and the extent to which 
these positions are filled by local staff. 
3. Partners and Sub-Recipients: If partners and/or sub-recipients will be proposed, the 
extent to which the oral presentation participants address uses of the sub-partners, 
including their contributions to the Activity’s objectives. Oral presentation participants 
demonstrate a sound management approach for building capacity of multiple local 
organizations at once while managing the grants component of the Activity. Oral 
presentation participants demonstrate appropriate organizational structure with clear 
roles and responsibilities that aligns with the proposed technical approach. 



C. History of Performance 

 

History of performance information must be submitted within seven (7) calendar days of 
receipt of the Phase 2 invitation and will be evaluated prior to the oral presentation and, 
therefore, will not be part of the oral presentation itself. Accordingly, this will be evaluated 
based on the extent to which performance reviews display organization history and 
expertise, the history of performance demonstrates experience in Colombia, and the history 
of successfully using proposed approaches. Applicants with no prior history of 
performance history will receive a neutral rating. 

 

E.3.3 Merit Review Criteria for Phase 3 - Apparent Winner 

 

The apparent winner from Phase 2, Oral Presentations, will be required to submit a Cost 
Application, detailed budget narrative, and draft Branding and Marking and AMELP Plans. 
The apparent winner may expect to receive feedback and requested edits or changes to both 
draft plans, but these plans are not part of the selection criteria. The Cost Application 
evaluation is detailed below. 

 

A. Cost Application (Apparent Winner only) 


 

Cost will not be assigned a score as the technical merit of applications is substantially more 
important than cost under this NOFO, but the final applicant’s budget will be analyzed for 
cost reasonableness, allocability, allowability, cost effectiveness and realism, adequacy of 
budget detail and financial feasibility and cost sharing. The percentage of funds spent on 
programming versus administrative costs will be taken into consideration, i.e., the cost of 
staff salaries, equipment, and facilities vs. costs of field activities and interventions that 
directly impact the target beneficiaries. The Agency will evaluate the cost application of 
the apparent winner under consideration for an award as a result of the merit criteria review 
to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found 
in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the 
financial aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within 
the amount requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives 
with reasonable economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating 
to costs should be included in the award. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a 
pre-award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the 
prospective recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and 
operational controls, financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – 
in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions 
of the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute 
the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 


B. Cost Sharing (Apparent Winner only) 


 

USAID has established a required cost share of 10% of the Award’s projected value of $23 
million for the full period of performance, including renewal awards, for the recipient of 
the award. Leveraged non-USAID resources from private firms and institutions (such as 
equipment, training, level of effort and any in-kind contributions) may be considered part 
of cost share. Cost sharing may be also demonstrated either through direct funding, 
beneficiary contributions, in-kind assistance, or a combination thereof. USAID shall make 
the final determination and assess whether or not the Applicants cost share contributions 
(e.g., categories or items) meet the standards set in 2 CFR 200. 

 

E.3.4 Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 

 

The Apparently Successful Applicant is required to submit a Branding Strategy and 
Marking (B&M) Plan to be reviewed by the Selection Committee and approved by the 
Agreement Officer prior to the award as part of the Final Application package. 

 

E.3.5 Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP) 

 

The Apparently Successful Applicant is required to submit a draft Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP) to be reviewed by the Selection Committee as 
part of the Final Application package. The final plan will be due 60 days after award, as 
described in Section F. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1. FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 


 

A notice of award signed by the AO is the authorizing document. USAID will provide it to the 
selected Recipient electronically. Unsuccessful Applicants will be notified. Award of the 
agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been appropriated, 
allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID anticipates that these 
procedures will be successfully completed, potential Applicants are hereby notified of these 
requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

F.2. ADMINISTRATIVE & NATIONAL POLICY REQUIREMENTS 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For Non-US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex #2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

F.3. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 


 

F.3.1 Financial Reports 

 

F.3.1.1 Quarterly Projected Expenditures: The Recipient must submit a spreadsheet, 
within 10 days following the end of each USG Federal Fiscal Quarter (e.g., by 
October 10, January 10, April 10 and July 10), showing quarterly projected 
expenditures to the AOR in accordance with the schedule specified by 
USAID/Colombia. 

 

F.3.1.2 Quarterly Accruals Reports: The Recipient is expected to submit accrual 
information to the AOR in accordance with the schedule specified by 
USAID/Colombia. 

 

F.3.2 Planning, Monitoring and Learning Reports 

 

All planning, monitoring, and learning reports must be submitted in English. 

 

F.3.2.1 Inception Period Work Plan: The inception period is a critical initial phase 
(the first six months of the Activity’s period of performance) to first analyze 
and understand the nature of the problem to be addressed, identify existing 
initiatives and organizations providing capacity building services, and where 
the Activity might best intervene to achieve the purpose. The Recipient must 


submit a work plan for the inception period that includes the proposed approach, 
sub-activities, expected results, work plan, management and staffing structure, 
budget, and timeline. This work plan must include a plan to ensure engagement 
of USAID, relevant local partners, and other USAID activities as well as 
engagement of other key stakeholders (GOC, private sector, civil society, etc.). 

 

In this inception phase, the Recipient will further test the geographic focus and 
may propose changes for USAID’s approval. 

 

Due Date: Thirty (30) calendar days from the start date of the award. 

 

F.3.3.2 Updated Activity Description: Based on inception period findings, the 
Recipient must submit an updated Activity Description for AO and AOR 
approval that reflects a more tailored and realistic strategy and effectively 
responds to the programmatic contexts. 

 

Due Date: Twenty (20) calendar days after the end of the six (6) month 
inception phase. 

 

F.3.2.3 Annual Implementation Plan (AIP): The AIP must include, at a minimum: 

• A strategic statement, articulating major Activity impacts over the life of 
the five-year award; 
• All proposed sub-activities, including expected accomplishments and 
progress towards achieving results and performance measures tied to the 
indicators agreed upon within the AMELP and to projected expenditures by 
quarter. 
• A timeline with relevant milestones indicated for implementation of the 
upcoming year’s proposed activities, including target completion dates. 
• Information on how sub-activities will be implemented. 
• Personnel requirements and consultancy needs during Activity 
implementation, including draft position descriptions and budget to achieve 
expected outcomes. 
• Details of collaboration with other major partners, other USAID/Colombia 
Activities, alliances, etc. 
• A Gender and Inclusion Strategy for the life of the five-year Activity, that 
will be updated with each AIP, as needed. The strategy must concretely 
describe and provide a basis for monitoring how the Activity will address 
issues related to gender and inclusion through the design and its 
implementation. The activities directly related to the implementation of the 
Gender and Inclusion Strategy must be included in each AIP. 
• A Sustainability Strategy that includes a plan of engagement with possible 
public and private sector entities, at the national and local level. This 
Strategy will be reviewed by AOR and USAID/Colombia Private Sector 
Engagement (PSE) specialists. Once the Sustainability Strategy is approved 
on year one, progress of its implementation must be reported in the 
Quarterly and Annual Performance Progress Reports. 
• A Communication plan and calendar itemizing milestones and identifying 



possible stories; and 
• Anticipated international travel if any. 


 

The AIPs must be organized in a manner that describes overarching (performance managementbased) 
intermediate results in connection with programmatic inputs (sub activities), outputs 
(process-based results such as model iterations developed), and outcomes (transformative results 
reflecting changed behavior, policies and strategies informed). The AIPs will also describe how 
sub-activities in a given year will lead to further activities and outcomes in subsequent/remaining 
years/period of performance, as well as how activities are leading towards long-term sustainability 
of Activity impacts. To finalize each AIP, the Recipient will engage in co-creation with the AOR 
and other relevant stakeholders. The AOR must approve all AIPs, including any significant 
changes or revisions thereto. 

 

Due Date: AIP year one: within forty (40) calendar days of the finalization of the six (6) month 
inception phase. Subsequent AIPs will cover activities through the end of the current USG Federal 
Fiscal Year (October 1 – September 30). 

 

Due Date Subsequent AIPs: August 31 of every year. It will cover the Activity from October 1 
through September 30. 

 

F.3.2.4 Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP): The 
Recipient will be responsible for developing and implementing an AMELP. 
This plan will describe the process for tracking and documenting progress 
against the Activity objectives and expected results, over the life of the fiveyear 
Activity. Its implementation will be used to identify challenges and lessons 
learned; influence decision-making for ongoing improvement and resource 
allocation; and serve for adaptive management. The AMELP must reflect the 
approach described in Section A. 

 

The AMELP must describe the MEL strategies, approaches and tasks as stated 
in USAID Automated Directives System (ADS) 201. It will contain at least the 
following sections: 

 

a. Introduction and/or Overview 


 

This section will include a brief description of the Activity, its results 
framework, the theory of change and its alignment with the Colombia Country 
Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS). 

 

b. Monitoring Plan 


 

This section will incorporate the monitoring approach including performance 
indicators of outputs and outcomes that must be clearly articulated to the results 
framework (or logic model) of the Activity. The main objective (or goal) and 
the higher-level objectives (or components) of the results framework must be 
aligned with at least one outcome indicator directly attributable to or affected 
by the Activity. All the objectives at the different levels of the results 


framework will include the necessary output indicators to track progress of the 
Activity. Baselines and targets for all performance indicators included must be 
settled and included in a summary table. 

 

This plan will also include context indicators to track conditions and external 
factors out of the direct control of the Activity, that are relevant to its 
implementation and that will be used to monitor assumptions and risks 
identified in the results framework. No targets are required for context 
indicators. With the context indicators, the Recipient must consider including 
at least one indicator to track and to comply with climate risk mitigation. When 
selecting performance and context indicators, the Recipient must consider their 
relevance and accuracy according to the intended results of the Activity, as well 
as the time and resources required to collect and report each indicator data. 

 

The AMELP may include strategic indicators from the Mission’s Performance. 

Management Plan and the Project MEL Plan linked to the Activity. This 
alignment will be done jointly with MEL USAID Staff. 

 

Some of the indicators proposed may include Foreign Assistance (F) Standard 

Indicators and USAID/Colombia Mission Indicators relevant for tracking 
progress of the expected results of the Activity. The Recipient will include this 
type of indicators in collaboration with the AOR and the MEL Specialists of 
USAID/Colombia. USAID/Colombia will provide guidance and the list: 
Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) of all active “F” and Mission 
indicators as soon as the Activity starts. As part of the AMELP, per ADS 
205.3.6, “Integrating Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID’s 
Program Cycle, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning”, the Recipient must 
include gender sensitive indicators that focus on gender equality and female 
empowerment. Specifically, the indicators are to be designed to track changes 
in key gender gaps and male and female roles. The Recipient must also 
disaggregate information by gender and age and provide an analysis of the 
differing impacts on women, children and vulnerable groups, which may be 
ethnic communities, persons with disabilities, or the LGBTI community. The 
Recipient is encouraged to use USAID’s Standard “F” indicators related to 
gender where appropriate, and to develop outcome indicators that quantitatively 
show the Activity’s impact on inequalities that exist in terms of gender and 
vulnerable populations. 

 

Data for beneficiary population indicators proposed must be disaggregated by 
geography (department, municipality), sex, and where possible, by age, by 
vulnerable and minority groups including ethnic groups. The Recipient must 
include gender sensitive indicators that focus on gender equality and female 
empowerment. Specifically, the indicators will be designed to track changes in 
key gender gaps and male and female roles. 

 

Beyond indicators, the Recipient will also incorporate as applicable other 
monitoring approaches that can provide qualitative insights, data collection on 


a more ad hoc basis, or more in-depth exploration into the achievement of 
results. 

 

c. Evaluation Plan 


The section will include any plan for internal evaluations to be developed by 
the Recipient over the life of the five-year Activity, the type of evaluation 
(performance or impact), purpose and expected use, and an initial approach to 
possible evaluation questions, estimated budget, planned start date, and 
estimated completion date. The evaluation plan will also include a plan for 
collaborating with the external evaluation planned by USAID for the Activity. 
This will entail ensuring that an external USAID-led evaluation team will have 
access to Activity information and to appropriate data collected by the 
Recipient, such as performance monitoring data. 

 

d. Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) Plan 


 

This section of the AMEL Plan will explain the Activity’s approach to learning 
from monitoring data, evaluation findings (if applicable) and other learning 
efforts, and how the Activity’s implementing partner – in collaboration with 
USAID Activities and other key stakeholders – will seek to pause, reflect, learn, 
and adapt throughout implementation. This section may broaden the scope of 
this section to function as a Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) plan 
for the Activity. This section will also be linked with the Communication and 
Outreach Plan. The plan may include: 

 

• Learning questions based on the activity or project’s logic model or 
potential gaps in the technical knowledge base, and efforts to explore those 
questions. 
• Knowledge generation, capture, lessons learned, success stories, and 
sharing efforts, including at the Activity’s implementation years and closeout. 
• Reflection opportunities (e.g., during work planning or quarterly reporting, 
after-action reviews, or other learning events). Information on potential 
participants, frequency, and utilization should be included. 
• Plans for adaptive management, based on learning and knowledge gained 
during implementation, including from identified learning questions that 
will enable the implementing partner and its key stakeholders to prompt 
course corrections as needed. 
• Strategic collaboration activities designed to support learning and adapting 
with and for key stakeholders (including USAID) relating to specific 
questions identified in the learning plan. 


 

e. Plan for Managing Data 


 

This section will have a full description of how the data and information will 
be collected, analyzed, and used, based on data quality standards referenced in 
ADS 201. This section will include the data collection methods, the data storage 


mechanisms, the formats in which data will be held and shared within the 
Recipient facilities, data security protocols and data analysis and use, bearing 
into consideration USAID’s data quality standards. 

 

This section must also include a preliminary identification of the Open Datasets 
to be collected and submitted in USAID’s open data portal 
(www.usaid.gov/data) according to ADS 579. If all the datasets cannot be 
identified to the moment of the AMELP approval, it must include provisions on 
future collection and submission in compliance with references of the ADS 579, 
such as incorporation of metadata and standards for geographic data. 

 

f. Roles and Responsibilities 


 

This section will describe the composition of the staff/personnel needed to carry 
out the monitoring, evaluation and learning activities for the implementation of 
the AMELP, including roles, responsibilities, and level of effort. 

 

g. PIRS (Performance Indicator Reference Sheets) and CIRS (Context 
Indicator Reference Sheets) 


A PIRS and CIRS must be completed for all performance and context indicators 
included in the Monitor Plan. Each one describes all the relevant information 
necessary for those who collect or ultimately use the indicator data. The chosen 
“F” Standard and USAID/Colombia Mission indicators must comply with the 
existing Standard PIRS so that the results can be aggregated at Colombia 
Mission and other USAID level. The Recipient may further define a “precise 
definition” according to the Activity’s context in the standard PIRS as 
appropriate. However, the precise definition must be within the scope of the 
indicator’s standard definition. 

 

h. Annexes: 


 

As per ADS 201, every instrument or method used to collect or analyze 
information will be referenced and annexed to the AMELP. Annexes may 
include also other narratives and tables that the Recipient consider relevant for 
complementing the previous sections. 

 

Resources for AMELP construction: 

 

For guidance on the AMELP construction please refer to ADS 201, How-to Note: Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation, and Learning Plan and ADS Reference 201maf Performance Indicator Reference Sheet (PIRS) 

 

Guidance & Template: USAID/Colombia will also provide the Recipient with additional templates 
and guidance. 

 


Elaboration and approval of the AMELP: 

 

The AOR in collaboration with the USAID/Colombia MEL Specialists, and other relevant 
stakeholders as appropriate, will engage in co-creation with the Recipient to review and finalize 
the AMELP, will verify that the proposed indicators are consistent with and meet the data 
collection needs of the Mission, and approve the plan. The AMELP is a critical mandatory tool for 
planning, managing, documenting, and evaluating performance over the life of the five-year 
Activity. If over the course of implementation, modifications to the AMELP become necessary, 
the changes to the Plan must be approved by the AOR. 

 

Due Date: Final AMEL Plan - 60 calendar days after award period of performance start date. 

 

F.3.2.5 Communications and Outreach Plan: USAID/Colombia conducts 
communications activities to raise public awareness, understanding, and 
support for the role and contribution of U.S. assistance programs in Colombia. 
The Recipient must support USAID’s outreach to Colombian and U.S. 
audiences by producing informative materials explaining USAID’s efforts to 
assist the people and government of Colombia to achieve the objectives outlined 
in Section A. 

 

The Communications and Outreach Plan must explain how the Recipient will 
create and implement a variety of appropriate outreach and communications 
tools and platforms to i) raise public awareness, understanding, and support for 
the Activity; ii) help advance the Activity’s programmatic objectives in 
accordance with the requirements of Section A and C; and iii) contribute to 
knowledge management, including through close coordination with the 
AMELP. 

 

The Communications and Outreach Plan must identify the audience (primary 
and secondary), format, schedule, and purpose of all internal and external 
communications products, including the required reports listed below. The 
Communications and Outreach Plan must provide an analysis of the internal 
and/or external environment and identify a set of project and communication 
objectives, key audiences - primary and secondary -, messages, appropriate 
communication products, implementation plan, budget, and evaluation 
framework. Illustrative examples of other products that might be included are 
electronic bulletins, infographics and/or newsletters. The Communications and 
Outreach Plan must include a narrative section describing the strategic purpose 
for each outreach tool not listed among the required reports. Additionally, the 
Communications and Outreach Plan must include a section describing the 
resource needs for each communications product, to ensure adequate planning 
and execution of the plan to produce high-quality, timely, succinct, and 
effective communications tools. The Plan must also describe how it articulates 
and complement the AMELP under the knowledge management umbrella; this 
must be evident in the communication and outreach activities included in the 
annual implementation plans. Finally, the plan must be designed for an initial 
two-year horizon, with a more detailed implementation plan for the first year. 

 


The draft Communications and Outreach Plan will be refined jointly with the 
AOR and USAID’s Development Outreach and Communications Specialist. 

 

The Communications and Outreach Plan must align with the Branding Strategy 
and Marking Plan, which describe how they will communicate to beneficiaries 
and stakeholder audiences that the work of this award is from the American 
people per the Branding Strategy and USAID Branding Guidelines (see 
www.usaid.gov/branding). 

 

Due Date: Draft Communications and Outreach Plan - Sixty (60) calendar days 
after Award period of performance start date. 

 

Final Communications and Outreach Plan - Thirty (30) calendar days after the 
end of the inception phase. 

 

F.3.2.6 Safety and Security Plan: One of USAID/Colombia’s primary programming 
concerns is that its implementing partners take all reasonable precautions to 
minimize risks to all staff and operations funded by the Agency. While risk can 
never be fully eliminated, USAID/Colombia expects its partners to be 
adequately prepared to work in the prioritized territories. The Recipient must 
submit a location-specific Safety and Security Plan for proposed operational 
areas, which may be as specific as by region, department, municipality, etc., 
where activities will occur. The Recipient will use discretion in providing a 
level of detail appropriate to the operating context and variance in conditions 
across the targeted areas. Submission of global security handbooks and/or 
policy documents does not qualify as a Safety and Security Plan. 

 

The Safety and Security Plan must be demonstrably written for and apply 
directly to the areas where activities will be implemented. All personnel and 
operations funded under this award, including sub-awardees or other partners 
with substantive programmatic contributions, must be covered by a safety and 
security plan. The Recipient must pay attention to the unique threats and 
vulnerabilities faced by their staff, beneficiaries, sub awardees, etc., and directly 
address these threats and vulnerabilities in safety and security plans. 

 

In terms of protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA) for activity 
staff, beneficiaries, sub-awardees, etc., the Recipient must describe how the 
activity will monitor this, as well as manage potential cases internally and 
externally according to relevant local laws. 

 

USAID/Colombia will not approve the safety and security plan. The safety and 
security plan are meant to demonstrate the Recipient’s due inclusion of a 
conflict-sensitivity and “Do No Harm” approach to ensure the security and 
protection of staff, beneficiaries, sub-awardees, etc. 

 

Due Date: Thirty (30) calendar days after the end of the inception phase. 

 


F.3.2.7 Security Reports: As part of the overall security requirements, the Recipient 
must report any security threats and/or incidents impacting the implementation 
of the award, verbally or by telephone, immediately to the AOR or Alternate 
AOR in the AOR’s absence. Subsequently, a written report must be promptly 
submitted. All sub-awardees will be required to report any threats/incidents to 
the prime Recipient, who will immediately after, notify the AOR. 

 

At the minimum, a security incident report must contain the name of the 
Organization, name of the individual(s), date, time, a description of what 
happened, where the incident occurred, and any other relevant details 
surrounding the incident. 

 

Due Date: The type and frequency of these reports may vary with the Activity 
scope and location. If this is an ongoing incident, progress reports must be 
submitted to keep the AOR apprised of the situation. 

 

F.3.2.8 Reporting in the Mission-wide Monitoring Management Information 
System (MONITOR): In compliance with ADS 201 and ADS 579 regarding 
data reporting, once the AMELP is approved by the AOR, the Recipient must 
register in USAID/Colombia’s MONITOR System (see Section 6.4 in 
Attachment A of this Cooperative Agreement) the following: 

 

a. Activity information (Summary, start/end dates, objective, budget, 
geographical coverage, target population, etc.). 


 

b. Sub-activity information (Summary, start/end dates, objective, budget, 
geographical coverage, target population, classification), etc. A sub-activity 
is understood as an effort within the Activity, carried out either directly by 
the Recipient or by its sub awardees. The sub-activity must have a clear 
purpose, USAID resources, indicators and targets linked to the Activity’s 
AMELP and an environmental determination. Sub-activities will be 
uploaded in the system on an ongoing basis. 


 

c. Sub-activity environmental compliance information. If the Activity is rated 
as “negative determination” or “positive determination” in the Initial 
Environmental Examination (IEE) and/or Environmental Threshold 
Decision (ETD), the Recipient will need to report on the compliance of 
applicable Environmental Management Approach (EMA) for each subactivity 
on a quarterly basis. The EMA must identify mitigation measures 
and training needs to avoid harming people and ensure the wise use of 
USAID money through thoughtful, environmentally sound economic 
development - for activities that are subject to one or more conditions set 
out in the “Recommended Threshold Decision” section of the IEE. The 
Recipient must keep in mind that it is its responsibility to: 


 

i. Develop and provide an EMA to the USAID/Colombia Mission 
Environment Officer (MEO) for review and approval by registering 



NOFO 72051421RFA00002 STRENTENING TOGETHER ACTIVITY 

each sub-activity in the MONITOR system 
(http://www.monitor.net.co). 

ii. All sub-activities must be approved by the MEO of 
USAID/Colombia before starting through the MONITOR system, 
including Categorical Exclusion. 
iii. Use the MONITOR system, as instructed by the MEO, to ensure 
compliance with USAID environmental regulation 22 CFR 216. 
iv. Ensure that any appropriate environmental guidelines are followed 
and that mitigation measures described in the pertinent Threshold 
Decision (IEE) for each of these activities are funded and 
implemented, including any necessary training or capacity building, 
and adequate monitoring. 
v. Ensure that the EMA is implemented, even under subcontracts and 
sub-grants. 
d. AMELP indicators (PIRS Information). The indicator results will be 
uploaded on a quarterly basis. Any modification to an Indicator and its PIRS 
needs to be validated and approved by USAID. 
e. The Recipient must report indicator progress into MONITOR, in parallel as 
the submission of the (Quarterly/Annual) Performance Progress Reports. 
This will allow aggregation of results at the Activity level and elaboration 
of progress reports by USAID/Colombia. 
Due Date: October 31, January 31, April 30, and July 31 

F.3.3 Performance Reports 
F.3.3.1 Quarterly Performance Progress Reports: The Quarterly Performance 
Progress Reports will inform on progress and activities of the preceding quarter 
under the Cooperative Agreement. The report must describe the tasks 
completed in the last quarter relative to what was anticipated by the approved 
AIP and will assess overall Activity’s progress to date relative to the 
performance indicator targets. Each report must include the following: 
• 
Name of the Activity and Implementer; award number; and period of 
performance. 
• 
Brief outline of Activity purpose and Activity approach. 
• 
Overall status of Activity progress towards programmatic and financial 
objectives (narrative). 
• 
Identify and relate the benchmarks and achievements towards planned 
targets, as identified in the Recipient’s AMELP of the three-month period 
of the approved Implementation Plan. 
• 
Provide status of overall Activity progress per the approved performance 
and context. 
• 
Update indicators defined in the AMELP, clearly distinguishing between 

relevant components of the results framework. 
• Succinct success stories and lessons learned for possible public 
dissemination. 
• Status of progress in implementation of the Gender & Inclusion Strategy, 
Sustainability Strategy, and the Communications and Outreach Plan. 
• Verification of compliance with cost share broken down by financial and/or 
in-kind contributions. 
• Programmatic Coordination and collaboration with other USAID 
Activities, if applicable. 
• Monitor indicator report and screenshots of documents uploaded to the DEC 
during the quarter. 
• If any key problems or issues were encountered, how they were or will be 
resolved, and, 
• if there are recommended Mission-level interventions to facilitate their 
timely resolution. 


 

Due Date: October 31, January 31, April 30, and July 31. The submission of 
the first report will begin following submission of the first AIP. 

 

F.3.3.2 Annual Performance Progress Reports: The Annual Performance Progress 
Report of the fiscal year will serve as the annual status report for the concluding 
year. The Annual Performance Progress Reports may be submitted in lieu of 
the fourth quarterly technical report. In addition to meeting the requirements of 
the Quarterly Performance Progress Reports, the annual report must include: 

 

• A discussion supported with quantitative and qualitative evidence (which 
will remain auditable under the terms of the Cooperative Agreement and 
USAID Activity. 
• implementation procedures), of impacts achieved to-date, including clear 
identification of which impacts achieved were within the manageable 
interests of the Recipient and which were likely catalyzed by Recipientsupported 
initiatives, 
• leading to substantial, sustained achievement of results, and, 
• Brief summary explaining how progress achieved and overall 
implementation contributed to build local capacity and promote 
sustainability beyond USG assistance. 


 

Due Date: October 31 of each year. 

 

F.3.3.3 Final Performance Progress Report: The Activity’s Final Performance 
Progress Report will include: an executive summary of the Recipient’s 
accomplishments in achieving results, targets, and impact; important research 
findings; comments and recommendations to USAID Colombia for future 
programming; and a fiscal report that describes how the Recipient’s funds were 
used. 

 

Due Date: Sixty (60) calendar days prior to the end date of the Award. 


F.4. PROGRAM INCOME 


 

If generated during award implementation, the Recipient must account for Program Income in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.80. Program income will be used in accordance with 2 CFR 
200.307(e)(2), added to funds committed by USAID and the Recipient to the Activity, and used 
for the purposes and under the conditions of the Federal award to further eligible Activity 
objectives. 

 

F.5. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE 


 

1a) The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 

identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. The Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs. 

 

1b) In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 

otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 

regulations, the latter will govern. 

 

1c) No activity funded under this cooperative agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental 
Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation.”) 

 

2) Initial Environmental Examinations (IEE) [LAC-IEE-20-94] & [LAC-IEE-19-49] have been 
approved for the Strengthening Together Activity. The IEEs cover activities expected to be 
implemented under this award. 

 

A Categorical Exclusion was issued to the Strengthening Together Activity development activities 
aiming at building capacity of the GOC to formulate and implement policies, support to policy 
consultation processes, support to institutional reform, training of staff are actions are not subject 
to the procedures set forth in 216.3, except to the extent provided herein, in accordance with 22 
CFR 216.2(c)(2): 

 

(i) Education, technical assistance, or training programs except to the extent such training 
programs includes activities directly affecting the environment (such as construction of 
facilities, etc.). 
(ii) Analyses, studies, academic or research workshops and meetings. 


 

USAID has determined that a Negative Determination with conditions applies to the activities 
below. This indicates that if these activities are implemented subject to the specified conditions, 


they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the environment. The Recipient will be 
responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be funded under this 
award. 

 

A Negative Determination with Conditions is issued to the Strengthening Together Activity for 
activities related to technical assistance to producing or processing crops and for small productive 
infrastructure. The Mission Environmental Officer (MEO) and the Agreement Officer's 
Representative (AOR) will oversee the implementation of appropriate environmental guidelines. 
Reports on these matters will be submitted by the Mission to LAC/BEO in Washington 
periodically. 

 

A Negative Determination with Conditions is issued to the Strengthening Together Activity for 
the use of pesticides in the agricultural production, being the condition the full use and application 
of the approved PERSUAP (LAC-IEE-09-19 or most recent). Any modification of the PERSUAP 
will have to be approved before the implementation of the program. The MEO and the COR/AOR 
will oversee the implementation of the PERSUAP. Reports on these matters will be submitted by 
the Mission to LAC/BEO periodically. 

 

A Negative Determination with Conditions is issued to the Strengthening Together Activity for 
activities needing small-scale infrastructure and small-scale construction. The condition is that the 
relevant USAID Environmental Guidelines for Development Activities in Latin America and 
Caribbean will be used in the implementation of these activities. The MEO, COR/AOR, and 
implementing partners will oversee the use of these Guidelines and their implementation. Reports 
on these matters will be submitted by the Mission to the LAC/BEO on an annual basis. 

 

The IEE contains a Positive Determination for the activities below. This indicates that these 
activities have the potential for significant adverse effects on the environment. Accordingly, the 
Recipient is required to comply with the terms of the Environmental Assessment (EA) addressing 
the environmental concerns raised by these activities. No activity identified under this Positive 
Determination can proceed until Scoping as described in §216.3(a)(4) and an EA as described in 
§216.6 are completed and approved by USAID. 

 

4a) As part of its initial Implementation Plan, and all Annual Implementation Plans thereafter, the 
Recipient, in collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and Mission 
Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, must review all ongoing 
and planned activities under this cooperative agreement to determine if they are within the scope 
of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 

4b) If the Recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it must prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities will be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

4c) Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation will be halted until an amendment to the documentation is submitted 
and written approval is received from USAID. 

 

5. When the approved Regulation 216 documentation is (1) an IEE that contains one or more 
Negative Determinations with conditions and/or (2) an EA, the Recipient must: 


5a) Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental 
mitigation and monitoring plan (EMMP) the Recipient must prepare an EMMP or an 
Environmental Review (ER) generated through the Monitor System describing how the Recipient 
will, in specific terms, implement all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed project 
activities within the scope of the award. The EMMP or ER must include monitoring the 
implementation of the conditions and their effectiveness. 

5b) Integrate a completed EMMP or ER into the initial Implementation plan. 

5c) Integrate an EMMP or ER Plan into subsequent Annual Implementation Plans, making any 
necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts to the 
environment. 

6a) Sub-grants are allowed under this award; therefore, the Recipient will be required to use an 
Environmental Review Form (ERF) or Environmental Review (ER) checklist using impact 
assessment tools to screen grant proposals to ensure that these will result in no adverse 
environmental impact, to develop mitigation measures, as necessary, and to specify monitoring 
and reporting. Use of the ERF or ER checklist is called for when the nature of the grant proposals 
to be funded is not well enough known to make an informed decision about their potential 
environmental impacts, yet due to the type and extent of activities to be funded, any adverse 
impacts are expected to be easily mitigated. Implementation of sub-grant and investment activities 
cannot go forward until the ERF or ER checklist is completed and approved by USAID. The 
Recipient is responsible for ensuring that mitigation measures specified by the ERF or ER checklist 
process are implemented. In cases where the nature of the investment is not well known enough to 
make an informed decision about potential environmental impacts, the final impact assessment can 
be deferred to a later stage in consultation with the AOR. 

7a) The Recipient will be responsible for periodic reporting to the USAID Agreement Officer 
Representative. 

 

Climate Risk 

 

All USAID projects and activities approved after October 1, 2016 are required to be assessed for 
climate risks. The process of assessing, addressing, and adaptively managing climate risks is 
known as climate risk management (see Climate Risk Management for USAID Projects and 
Activities, a Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 201 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/201mal_042817.pdf). The goal of 
climate risk management is to make USAID’s development work more resilient to potential 
changes in climate or weather conditions -- such as increasing temperatures, more frequent 
droughts or floods, or large storms. These events can have potential negative consequences on 
projects or activities, making it more difficult to achieve results. With better analysis and planning, 
USAID can anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to these changing conditions and avoid inadvertently 
increasing our exposure to risk. 

Climate risk is the potential for negative consequences due to changing climatic conditions where 
the outcome is uncertain. The focus of climate risk management at USAID is on the risk to USAID 
development programs. This risk consists of individual climate risks—potentially severe adverse 
consequences for development programs resulting from the interaction of climate-related hazards 
with the vulnerability of societies and systems exposed to climate change. A climate risk may arise 
when something is exposed to a climate stressor such as higher temperatures, flooding or drought. 


The level of risk increases as the magnitude of the negative consequence from the exposure 
increases and it also increases as the likelihood of the negative consequence increases. 

For STA, USAID/Colombia conducted the climate risk assessment and will present results to the 
Recipient during the Post Award Orientation Meeting. If the assessment indicates moderate or high 
climate risks, each risk must be addressed by integrating risk management measures into activity 
implementation. This will be done through an Environmental Management Approach (EMA) in 
the Monitor system, where the Recipient will describe specifically how it will implement all Initial 
Environmental Examination (IEE) conditions and mitigation measures that result from the climate 
risk screening that apply to proposed activities within the scope of the award, including identified 
climate risks. 

 

F.6. OTHER REQUIREMENTS (RESERVED) 


 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

G.1. NOFO Points of Contact 

 

The Agreement Officer for this Award is: 

 

Heather Wirick 

Agreement Officer 

U.S Agency for International Development 

Carrera 45 No. 24B-27 

Bogota, Colombia 

Email: hwirick@usaid.gov 

 

The Acquisition and Assistance Specialist for this Award is: 

 

German Camilo Gutierrez 

Senior Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

U.S Agency for International Development 

Carrera 45 No. 24B-27 

Bogotá, Colombia 

Email: ggutierrez@usaid.gov 

 

G.2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov. 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public 
funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of funds 
and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, must mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole 
or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made 
as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have 
the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 
restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if 
it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are 
contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of 
this application.” 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 


ANNEX LIST 

 

Annexes 1-5 are attached with the NOFO package in www.grants.gov 

 

• ANNEX 1 – BUDGET TEMPLATE 


 

• ANNEX 2 – STANDARD PROVISIONS AND REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE FOR 
U.S AND NON-U.S ORGANIZATIONS. 


 

• ANNEX 3 – BRANDING AND MARKING GUIDANCE AND TEMPLATE FOR 


ASSISTANCE AWARDS 

 

• ANNEX 4 – NON-US ORGANIZATION PRE-AWARD SURVEY 


 

• ANNEX 5 – HISTORY OF PERFORMANCE FORM 


 

• ANNEX 6 – LIST OF ACRONYMS 


 

[END OF ANNEX LIST] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 


ANNEX 1 - BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

An attachment is included in the NOFO in Excel format (.xslx) for the applicant to complete. 

 

 [END OF ANNEX 1] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). 

 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that 
is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory and Required as Applicable Provisions 
for either U.S. or non-U.S. Non-governmental organizations. The following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions for both types of organizations are listed below: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 



Required 

Not Required 

Standard Provision 



 

 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PREDETERMINED (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL 
(Profit) (DECEMBER 2014) 



RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 
2020) 



X 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING 
(JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



 

X 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH 
SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 



 

X 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 



X 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING 
COUNTRY TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 



X 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 



X 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 



 

X 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 



X 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



 

X 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 



 

X 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

X 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY 
OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR 
SEX TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 






X 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE 
(DECEMBER 2004) 



 

X 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 



 

X 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 



X 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 



X 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

X 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (NOVEMBER 
2020) 



 

X 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 



X 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 



X 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 



X 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 



X 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 



 

X 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 
2020) 



 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 



Required 

Not Required 

Standard Provision 



TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



 

 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 



RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 



RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 
2020) 



X 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 






X 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 



X 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 



X 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



 

X 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 



X 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING 
(JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 



X 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 



X 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 



 

X 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED 
IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 



 

X 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 
2012) 



 

X 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

X 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



 

X 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 



 

X 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

X 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF 
THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

X 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL 
ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 



X 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 



X 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 
2016) 



X 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 



 

X 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY (NOVEMBER 
2020) 



 
[END OF ANNEX 2] 


 ANNEX 3 – BRANDING AND MARKING GUIDANCE AND TEMPLATE FOR 

ASSISTANCE AWARDS 

 

1. GUIDANCE 


 

1.1 ADS 320.3.3 Branding and Marking Requirements for Assistance Awards 




 

USAID’s policy is that programs, projects, activities, public communications, or commodities 
implemented or delivered under assistance instruments – such as grants, cooperative agreements, 
or other assistance awards – generally are “co-branded and comarked.” In accordance with Section 
700.16 of Title 2 of the CFR, this policy applies to assistance awards even when the award does 
not require any cost sharing (see ADS 303.3.10). 

 

Please note that while USAID requires exclusive USAID branding and marking for acquisition 
awards, and co-branding with the assistance Recipient for assistance awards, USAID generally 
manages branding and marking in a similar manner for all U.S foreign assistance, to promote a 
consistent approach to branding and marking across all the Agency’s programs and maintain a 
brand identity that there are “from the American People.” 

 

1.2 ADS 320.3.3.1 Co-branding and Co-marking for Assistance Awards 




 

"Co-branding" and “co-marking” mean that the program, project, or activity marking represents 
both USAID and the implementing partner. The USAID Identity must appear on program materials 
produced for programmatic purposes with equivalent or greater size and prominence than the 
identity or logo of the implementing partner, a Recipient, another donor, or any third party. 
Program materials include the examples set forth in Section 700.16 of Title 2 of the CFR 700. 

 

The AO, after consulting with the Principal Officer and RO, may determine that a program's goals 
require that the USAID Identity be larger and more prominent, if USAID is the majority donor and 
the USAID-funded program, project, or activity is especially important to USAID. 

 

A host-country symbol or ministry logo or other U.S. Government seal or logo may also be added, 
if applicable. See Section 320.3.5.1 on the use of an additional or substitute logo or seal and tagline 
to represent a presidential, or other high-level interagency Federal initiative. 

 

Please see the USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide for further 
information on co-branding. 

 

1.3 ADS 320.3.3.2 Branding and Marking Requirements for Specific Grant, Cooperative 
Agreement, or Other Assistance Awards 




 

Requirements for marking assistance, including requests for presumptive exceptions and waivers 
for assistance awards, must comply both with this ADS chapter and Section 700 of Title 2 of the 
CFR, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal 
Awards. By policy, USAID requires nonU.S., non-governmental organizations, including nongovernmental 
organizations in partner countries, to follow marking requirements for assistance 
awards as set forth in this ADS chapter and Section 700 of Title 2 of the CFR. AOs and the relevant 
RO(s), with support as needed from DOCs, Bureau/Office Communications Officers, and the 


Senior Advisor for Brand-Management in LPA, are responsible for ensuring that Apparently 
Successful Applicants and Recipients are familiar with the Agency’s requirements for branding 
and marking. 

 

Whether in connection with a competitive award, an unsolicited proposal, or other noncompetitive 
award, every Apparently Successful Applicant must submit a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 
(see Section 320.3.1.4 regarding adding incremental funding to existing awards). The Marking 
Plan may include requests for the AO to approve presumptive exceptions (see Section 700.16 [gh] 
of Title 2 of the CFR). A determination by an AO before the Agency makes an award that none 
of the presumptive exceptions applies is not subject to a separate appeal process, but the normal 
procedures for awarding or administering a grant may address it. A determination by an AO after 
the Agency makes an award that a presumptive exception does not apply is subject to the appeals 
process in Section 700 of Title 2 of the CFR. 

 

The Branding and Marking Monitoring and Verification form serves as a tool to assist AORs. in 
monitoring implementing partners’ compliance with marking requirements. 

 

2. TEMPLATES 


 

2.1 BRANDING STRATEGY 

 

THIS PORTION TO BE COMPLETED BY THE RECIPIENT 

“USAID BRANDING STRATEGY” 

AWARD TITLE 

AWARD NUMBER 

DATE OF PLAN 

 

1. Positioning 














 

● What is the intended name of this program, project, or activity? 




 

● Will this be co-branded with the partner/organization? If yes, how? 




 

● Will a program logo be developed and used consistently to identify this program? If yes, 
please attach a copy of the proposed program logo. 




 

2. Program Communications and Publicity 














 

● Who are the primary and secondary audiences for this project or program? 




 

● What communications or program materials will be used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries? 




 

● What is the main program message? 




 

● Will the Recipient announce and promote publicly this program or project to host country 




 citizens? If yes, what press, and promotional activities are planned? 


● Please provide any additional ideas about how to increase awareness that the American 
people support this project or program. 




 

3. Acknowledgements 














 

● Will there be any direct involvement from a host country government ministry? If yes, please 
indicate which one or ones. Will the Recipient acknowledge the ministry as an additional 
cosponsor? 




 

Note: it is perfectly acceptable and often encouraged for USAID to "co-brand" programs with 
government ministries. 

 

● Indicate if there are any other groups whose logo or identity the partner will use on programs 
with government ministries. 




 

4. Budget 














 

Please include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such 
as plaques, stickers, banners, press events and materials. 

 

2.2 MARKING PLAN 

 

2.2.1 General Instructions 

 

USAID’s policy requires non-U.S., non-governmental organizations, including cooperating 
country non-governmental organizations (and in rare cases, Public International Organizations) to 
follow marking requirements for assistance awards. Marking requirements, including requests for 
presumptive exceptions and waivers for assistance awards must be in accordance with 2 CFR 
700.16(h). 

 

With reference to ADS Sections 320.3.3.2 and 2 CFR 700.16, the Recipient must prepare a 
Marking Plan containing information substantially similar to the sample provided below: 

 

“USAID MARKING PLAN” 

AWARD TITLE 

AWARD NUMBER 

DATE OF PLAN 

 

(1) Requirement: A description of the public communications, commodities, and program 
materials that the Recipient will produce as a part of the grant or cooperative agreement and 
which will visibly bear the USAID identity. These include: (i) program, project, or activity 
sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure projects or other programs, projects, 
or activities that are physical in nature; (ii) technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, 
publications, audiovisual productions, public service announcements, websites/Internet 
activities, and other promotional, informational, media, or communication products funded by 









USAID; (iii) events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 
exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences, and other public activities; and (iv) all 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief programs, 
and all other equipment, supplies and other materials funded by USAID, and their export 
packaging. 








 

(2) Table of Supplies and Equipment to be used in a visible manner in the fulfillment of the goals. 








of the ________ project and an indication of how and where they will be tagged with the 
USAID identity. 

 

 


(3) Table of Deliverables expected to be produced in the conduct of this program: All deliverables 
will be marked in a visible manner with the USAID identity; below is an indication of what 
type of marking will be used and where on the deliverable the USAID identity will be placed. 








 


(4) Sub-Recipient: As specified in the standard provisions, the marking requirements will “flow 
down” to Sub-Recipients or sub-awards and will include the USAID-approved marking 
provision in all USAID funded sub-awards, as follows: “As a condition of receipt of this 
subaward, marking with USAID identity of a size and prominence equivalent to or greater that 
the Recipient’s, Sub-Recipient’s, other donor’s or third party’s is required.” 








 

(5) Any “public communications,” as defined in 2 CFR 700.1 (j), funded by USAID, in which the 
content has been approved by USAID, will contain the following disclaimer: 

“This study/report/audio-visual/other information/media product (specify) is made possible by the 
generous support of the American people through the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID). The contents are the responsibility of [insert Recipient’s name] and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government.” 

 

(6) As specified in the standard provisions, ___________ will provide the Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) or other USAID personnel designated in the grant or cooperative agreement 
with two copies of all program and communications materials produced under the award. In 


addition, ____________ will submit one electronic or one hard copy of all final documents to 
USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse. 

 

[END OF ANNEX 3] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 


ANNEX 4 – NON-US PREAWARD SURVEY 

 

NUPAS Report Table 

 

Name of Organization: ________________________________ 

 

Proposed Activity/Amount: ________________________________ 

 

Survey Conducted by: ________________________________ 

 



No. 

Criterion 

Average score 



1 

Legal Structure 

 



2 

Financial Management and Internal Control Systems 

 



3 

Procurement Systems 

 



4 

Human Resources Systems 

 



5 

Project Performance Management 

 



6 

Organization Sustainability 

 



 

Overall Score 

 



 

1. Legal Structure 



Risk Areas Reviewed 

Observations and Findings 

Score 



1.1 Local Organization 
Definition 

 

 



1.2 Legal 
Requirements 

 

 



1.3 Organizational 
Structure 

 

 



1.4 Governance 

 

 






1.5 Control 
Environment 

 

 



 

2. Financial Management and Internal Control Systems 



Risk Areas Reviewed 

Observations and Findings 

Score 



2.1 Banking Relationship 
and Accounts 

 

 



2.2 
Accounting/Bookkeeping 
system 

 

 



2.3 Chart of Accounts, 
General Ledger and 
Financial Statements 

 

 



2.4 Variance Analysis 
(Budget to Actual Costs) 

 

 



2.5 Allowable and 
Unallowable Cost 

 

 



2.6 Direct and Indirect 
Costs 

 

 



2.7 Payments – 
Segregation of Duties 

 

 



2.8 Accounting Cycle 

 

 



2.9 Financial Records 
Management 

 

 



2.10 Sources of Funding 

 

 



2.11 Financial Reporting 

 

 






2.12 Audit and Review of 
Financial Statements 

 

 



2.13 Financial 
Management Personnel 

 

 



 

3. Procurement Systems 



Risk Areas Reviewed 

Observations and Findings 

Score 



3.1 Procurement 
Policies, Procedures 
and Practices 

 

 



3.2 Compliance with 
Policies and 
Procedures – 
Reasonableness of 
Price 

 

 



3.3 Procurement and 
Sub-awards 

 

 



 

4. Human Resources Systems 



Risk Areas Reviewed 

Observations and Findings 

Score 



4.1 Overall HR 
Policies and 
Procedures 

 

 



4.2 Staff Time 
Management 

 

 



4.3 Payroll System 

 

 



4.4 Travel Policies and 
Procedures 

 

 



 

 

 


5. Project Performance Management 



Risk Areas Reviewed 

Observations and Findings 

Score 



5.1 Technical 
Evaluation Criteria 

 

 



5.2 Project 
Management Capacity 

 

 



 

6. Organizational Sustainability 



Risk Areas Reviewed 

Observations and Findings 

Score 



6.1 Cash Flow 
Management 

 

 

 



6.2 Absorptive 
Capacity 

 

 



 

[END OF ANNEX 4] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 


ANNEX 5 - PAST PERFORMANCE REFERENCE CHECKLIST 

 

Applicant's Name: 

Was the Applicant the Prime or Sub on the project: 

Project Name: 

Project Scope/Description: 

Period of Performance: Dollar Value: 

Name of Person Contacted: Click here to enter text. E-mail.: 

Date Contacted: Employer: 

Contact’s Role or Knowledge of the Project: 

 



1. Please comment on your satisfaction with the quality of product or service, including 
consistency in meeting goals and targets and rating. 


 

 

 



2. Please comment on the timeliness of performance, to include schedule, the timeliness 
against the completion of the award, task orders, milestones, delivery schedules, and 
administrative requirements and rating (use table in the appendix for definitions). 


 

 

 



3. Please comment on the quality of business relations, addressing the history of professional 
behavior and overall business-like concern for the interests of the customer, including the 
applicant’s history of reasonable and cooperative behavior: and rating: 


 

 

 



4. Please comment on the organization’s ability to control cost, including forecasting costs as 
well as accuracy in financial reporting and rating: 


 

 

 



5. Please provide comments on organizations key personnel and rating: 


 

 

 



 

[END OF ANNEX 5] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 

 


ANNEX 6 – ACRONYMS LIST 

 

ADS Automated Directives System 

AIP Annual Implementation Plan 

AMELP Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 

AO Assistance Officer 

AOR Assistance Officer Representative 

BSMP Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 

CDCS Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

CLA Collaboration, learning and adapting. 

COP Chief of Party 

CPA Certified Public Account 

DOC Development Outreach Communication 

EMA Environmental Management Approach 

ETD Environmental Threshold Decision 

GAAS Generally Accepted Auditing Standards 

GOC Government of Colombia 

IEE Initial Environmental Examination 

MEO Mission Environment Officer 

MONITOR Monitoring Management Information System 

NGO Non-governmental Organizations 

NICRA Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement 

NOFO Notice of Funding Opportunity 

PIO Public-Private Partnerships 

PIRS Performance Indicator Reference Sheet 

TEC Technical Evaluation Committee 

USG U.S. Government 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

[END OF NOFO 72051421RFA00002] 

 

THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 

 


