Horizontal_RGB_600


NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY 













 



































NIGER GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY 
AND POLICY REFORM ACTIVITY 

















USAID/SENEGAL 
SAHEL REGIONAL OFFICE (SRO) 
NOFO NO.: 72068519RFA00003 
December 2018 










Issue Date: December 03, 2018 

Deadline for Question: December 14, 2018 

Closing Date: January 11, 2019 

Closing Time: 16:30 Local Dakar, Senegal Time 



Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72068519RFA00003 



Program Title: NIGER GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY AND POLICY 
REFORM ACTIVITY 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 



Ladies/Gentlemen: 



The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the NIGER GOVERNMENT 
ACCOUNTABILITY AND POLICY REFORM program. Eligibility for this award is not 
restricted. 



USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. 



To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted 
on www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly 
check the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 



USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.h. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description Page 5 

 

 

Section B – Federal Award Information Page 26 

 

 

Section C – Eligibility Information Page 29 

 

 

Section D – Application and Submission Information Page 30 

 

 

Section E – Application Review Information Page 44 

 

 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information Page 46 

 

 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts Page 51 

 

 

Section H – Other Information Page 52 

 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by 
USAID to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development 
Objectives. Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” and 
“Project” as used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and implementation of 
USAID development assistance. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


NIGER GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY AND POLICY REFORM ACTIVITY 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

 

Niger is receiving unprecedented attention from the U.S. Government (USG) and the broader 
international community due to the rise of instability throughout the Sahel, while concurrently the 
Government of Niger (GON) has emerged as a partner committed to improving regional and local 
security. The conclusions of multiple USG and other donor assessments and strategies are clear 
that more effective governance writ large and, more specifically, an increase in government 
responsiveness to citizen needs are critical to future security and development efforts in Niger. 
This lack of government accountability manifests itself in several ways, to include inaction at the 
policy-level to address constraints to economic growth, community development, and security, 
and to improve the operating environment for sectoral investments, including those of USAID. 

 

In this context, USAID seeks a proposal for a new assistance award – cooperative agreement, 
entitled “Participatory Responsive Governance – Government Accountability and Policy Activity 
(PRG-GAP).1” The innovative approach USAID is proposing will build coalitions for reform 
(demand side) while providing targeted assistance to national institutions willing and able to 
champion reform (supply side). The demand and supply-side efforts will be bridged via the 
creation and strengthening of mechanisms and spaces for multi-stakeholder, policy-level dialogue 
and reform. These approaches will be coupled with intensive donor coordination to catalyze 
critical policy reforms relevant to the successful implementation of major USAID development 
interventions. The totality of this activity should result in enhanced government accountability 
and responsiveness to citizen needs and usher in an improved policy framework. 

1 The recipient can propose a new name for this Activity to include names in French, Hausa, or Zarma that will 
resonate with citizens. 

 

 

A critical key to success of this Activity will be the extent to which supported policies and 
approaches are demand driven. As such, the Recipient is expected to form close partnerships with 
USAID’s sectoral partners and to target both demand and supply-side assistance to advance 
reforms identified as priorities by USAID projects and their sectoral stakeholders. In fact, PRGGAP 
is a supporting mechanism of the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced II program managed by 
the USAID Sahel Regional Office and serves as the national-level mechanism to advance sectoral 
reforms and strengthen key civil society and government institutions. 

 

Subject to availability of funds, USAID anticipates making $7 million available for this new 
Award. 

 

II. BACKGROUND 

 

Over the past two decades, despite increasing amounts of Official Development Assistance 
(ODA) and relative success in attracting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), particularly in the 
mining sector and the telecommunications industry, Niger remains stalled at the bottom of the 


United Nations Development Program’s (UNDP) Human Development Index (HDI). While the 
GON’s response to exogenous factors such as violent extremism (VE) and terrorism has burdened 
the country’s budget and disrupted the national economy in many regions, decreasing government 
performance is also attributable to government ineffectiveness, lack of citizen voice and 
government accountability, and corruption. This lack of government responsiveness to both the 
needs of citizens and development stakeholders has translated into citizen dissatisfaction with 
public service provision and hindered sustainable development outcomes. In fact, public service 
provision has decreased in critical development sectors. As an example, the education sector is 
routinely disrupted by teacher and student strikes throughout the school year, resulting in 
significant negative impact on education quality. In addition, the Ministry of Education is unable 
to manage the education workforce. The main complaints of teachers and students alike revolve 
around unpaid salaries and scholarships, lack of educational infrastructure, and nepotism and 
corruption in career management and teacher deployment. The result is a dysfunctional public 
education system that does not provide any adequate level of education to the vast majority of 
students. 

 

The current environment cultivated by the GON’s lack of responsiveness and transparency 
adversely impacts citizens’ daily lives, but is also a constraint to development efforts being 
undertaken to address gaps in many sectors, and deter private investors from engaging in longterm 
partnerships. At the same time, key national policy, oversight, and service delivery 
institutions don’t have the authority or capacity to effectively fulfill their mandates and respond to 
the needs of their constituents. The examples are numerous but one example is Niger’s anticorruption 
agency (HALCIA) reports to the Presidency and lacks financial independence. 
HALCIA actively investigates cases of corruption in health, education, and other sectors 
supported by USAID but the cases are sent to the Presidency for a determination on the course of 
action. As a result, the GON will prosecute some cases of corruption but not those involving 
individuals with ties to the ruling majority or those that may result in a judgement against the 
state’s interests. At the same time, civil society currently does not have the voice or tools to track 
instances of corruption and mobilize to push for more prosecutions. 

 

Low civic engagement has also contributed to perpetuating poor government performance and 
impunity. A growing number of citizens have lost faith in the effectiveness of the modern socalled 
democratic government. As a result, some youth are falling prey to violent extremist 
organizations’ (VEO’s) rhetoric about state inequality, nepotism, and ineffectiveness. In spite of 
this dismal picture, many civil society organization (CSO) leaders, journalists, private sector 
entities, reform champions, and decision makers are working with donor support, and continue to 
believe that change is possible. 

 

Overview of the Development Problem 

 

Since the HDI’s inception in 1990, Niger has consistently ranked at the bottom of the index. 
Niger’s poor performance – which reflects the GON’s overall performance – raises questions 
regarding the GON’s policy decisions and its ability to respond to citizen needs. Even within the 
Sahel, Niger lags behind its neighbors and peers (Benin, Burkina Faso, and Mali) on the World 
Bank’s governance indicators that measure political stability, government effectiveness, rule of 


law, regulatory quality, and corruption control. A number of factors have contributed to Niger’s 
persistently low ranking at the bottom of the HDI, including: 

 

Weak Civil Society and Low Civic Engagement 

 

Nigeriens’ civic engagement is very low. CSO membership is minimal and members seldom pay 
their dues, which is one factor in their overwhelming reliance on donor funding for administration 
and programming costs. This reliance often makes CSOs more beholden to donor priorities, 
instead of identifying and addressing local priorities. CSO dependence on donor funding also 
diverts their attention from substantial engagement on critical governance issues to focus on 
donor funding opportunities. While labor unions have been vocal and visible with frequent strikes 
and demonstrations to vocalize their collective interests, their enthusiasm and engagement does 
not extend to defending issues of broader public concern. Niger’s private sector, which is vital to 
the country’s economic growth, is still relatively weak and has yet to develop into a significant 
lobbying block to advocate for an improved business and investment enabling environment. In 
short, individual and collective actions designed to identify and address issues of broad public 
concern often have few champions, who themselves have limited capacity to initiate, analyze, and 
advocate for development policies or build popular support. In the face of little or no demand for 
reform, the government has no incentive or reason to take action. 

 

There are, however, signs of what is possible emanating from social transformation champions. 
Despite lack of government support, influential CSO leaders and journalists have recently 
mobilized citizens for collective action in urban areas and are proactively monitoring public 
sector performance. CSO activists have successfully advocated for hygiene and sanitation 
activities in Niamey, which are now currently under implementation and gaining traction from the 
central government. Social media-based campaigns have increased awareness of VEO violence on 
populations in the Lake Chad Basin region and resulted in a call to action to stem the violence and 
provide humanitarian assistance. Nigerien media, through investigative journalism, revealed 
financial scandals and various corruption schemes involving senior government officials in 2017. 
Some producer associations have also had success in advocating for and finding resources to 
support producers and their communities. 

 

Poor Policy Reform Environment 

 

Low public accountability and civic engagement are major reasons for poor governance 
performance and weak mechanisms and environment for policy reform. Development activities 
designed to directly support GON’s development objectives face legal and policy hurdles that 
hinder performance and prevent measurable and sustainable results. In many sectors, such as 
education, health, food security, agriculture, water, and governance, the legal and institutional 
environment presents weaknesses and gaps not conducive to sustainable development. Local 
solutions to development issues cannot be sustained or scaled up without national policies and 
legal frameworks to support them. Local conventions, for example, supported under USAID’s 
resilience project have proven themselves instrumental in reducing farmer-herder conflicts by 
facilitating agreement over use of and access to natural resources and mediation mechanisms to 
resolve disputes. Ultimately, sustainability will require increased funding and policy changes 
supported by the central government recognizing the efforts at the local level. 


Core DRG problem: Political Accountability and Competition 

 

In 2017, USAID conducted a nationwide democracy, human rights and governance (DRG) 
assessment in Niger. The assessment found that deficits exist in each of the five DRG 
dimensions2 but that the core of Niger’s poor development performance is centered on weak 
political competition and government accountability. In short, the combination of low citizen 
engagement to hold the government accountable and actively participate in economic and political 
processes, a lack of information and access to government opportunities, and ineffective 
accountability within government institutions results in a vicious circle whereby the GON has 
little incentive to improve services or enact more responsive policies to citizen needs. At the 
same time, citizens do not believe that action will bring about change. 

2 The five dimensions defined by USAID’s Strategic Assessment Framework (SAF) are Consensus, Inclusion, 
Political Accountability and Competition, Rule of Law and Human Rights, and Government Responsiveness and 
Effectiveness 

 

Critical national government institutions responsible for government oversight, ensuring 
government transparency and accountability, and providing checks and balances in governance 
structures depend financially on and are politically aligned with the executive branch. This 
conflict of interest with the executive hinders their capacity to fulfill their mandate effectively. 

 

In fact, Niger’s public expenditure and financial accountability mechanisms, the backbone of 
policy implementation in any sector, are rated among the lowest of the world (Niger’s Open 
Budget Index ranking is 17/100). Niger’s budget process is not open to citizen input and suffers 
from limited effectiveness of Parliamentary oversight of the executive. The Supreme Audit 
Institution files annual audit reports addressed to the head of the executive branch as a simple 
formality. The HALCIA investigates mismanagement of public funds but major instances of 
corruption are rarely prosecuted, especially if they involve those with ties to the government. The 
impunity of connected elites further fuels citizen anger and frustration. 

 

Niger also suffers from opaque policy formation and government decision making and 
implementation without sufficient citizen input. Legislative and policy formulation and adoption 
are often not participatory or transparent, and consequently lack popular support – which in turn 
hinders effective implementation. 

 

Niger’s Parliament, for example, is one of those public accountability institutions with a strong 
mandate on paper but which struggles to fully accomplish its mandate. Parliament is dependent 
politically and financially on the executive branch, with the ruling coalition holding four-fifths of 
the seats. Parliament has shown a want and ability to both conduct executive oversight (e.g., 
questioning ministers on government performance) and form better public policy (e.g., the 
Defense Committee meeting with conflict-affected communities to understand the impact of 
security measures). At the same time, the executive branch is still able to effectively control the 
parliamentary agenda and legislation. 

 


Lessons Learned from USAID Assessments 

 

The Niger DRG Assessment recommended that USAID focus on realistic interventions, 
primarily at the local level and linked to ongoing resilience and CVE-focused initiatives, to 
consolidate and extend positive impacts across sectors. On the other hand, due to current 
incentive structures, the assessment concluded that the impact of supporting broad state-led 
policy reform initiatives at the national level will be limited. The assessment also highlighted 
the need to support the integration of DRG principles and practices across USAID’s 
development portfolio given the weak state of governance in all sectors and at all levels. These 
findings largely drove the design of this activity. Namely, the strong focus on building 
coalitions for reform and mechanisms to improve government accountability; building off of 
USAID’s local level, sectoral investments. 

 

USAID program assessments and evaluations also found that poor implementation of existing 
policies hinder development outcomes. For example, in the education and health sectors, 
ineffective regulations governing the recruitment, placement, and monitoring of civil servants 
has resulted in uneven placement of teachers and health workers across the country, especially 
in rural areas. In agriculture, the Millennium Challenge Corporation, USAID, World Bank, and 
others are supporting seed and fertilizer sector reform to improve market efficiency. 

 

Niger is also in need of instituting policies that are more youth and gender focused. In 
addition, rigorous data collection and analysis is required to better understand the most critical 
constraints to growth and development and to determine what approaches are most effective 
and should be scaled-up. 

 

In this context of low horizontal accountability, poor public sector performance is a perpetual 
source of frustration for citizens. In the absence of a mechanism for recourse, the fear is the weak 
governance, poor service delivery, and impunity will push citizens to join VEO’s. Illegal and/or 
violent alternatives to defend or promote interests are an option for Nigeriens in remote and 
under-governed parts of the country. 

 

Due to the distrust between the GON and civil society, development partners will have to play a 
critical role in facilitating constructive engagement between the government, citizens, and civil 
society. USAID, in coordination with this activity, will champion donor coordination to support 
constructive engagement spaces on the most binding institutional, legal and policy barriers 
hindering the provision of public goods and effectiveness of development investments. 

 

 

III. INTEGRATED PROGRAM STRATEGY 

 

The overall success of this Award will be directly related to the recipients’ ability to implement 
an integrated activity in which interventions are closely coordinated with and leverage prior and 
current assistance provided by USAID and other donors. 

 

USG Integrated Country Strategy (ICS) 

 


Demand Driven Reform: 

As highlighted in the Introduction, 
USAID expects this Activity to directly 
support reforms identified by USAID 
sectoral partners as critical to improving 
the enabling environment and advancing 
their objectives. In the same manner, this 
Activity should support demand and 
supply-side institutions best positioned 
to champion and advance the desired 
sectoral reforms. 

The activity closely aligns with and contributes to U.S. Embassy Niger’s Integrated Country 
Strategy (ICS) 2016-2018. The activity will specifically support ICS Goal 1: Strengthen 
democratic institutions and stability by improving government accountability, service 
delivery, and respect for human rights and the following supporting Mission Objective and 
Sub-Objective: 

 

● Mission Objective 1.2: Targeted Nigerien executive branch institutions 
increase their capacity and effectiveness, leading to improved management 
and more equitable access to quality services 
● Mission Sub-Objective 1.2.1: Greater implementation of sectoral 
reforms, leading to improved capacity in planning, policy-making, 
implementation, and leadership 


 

Coordination with Other USAID Programs and Activities 

 

The PRG-GAP is a supporting mechanism of the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced II (RISE II) 
program managed by the USAID Sahel Regional Office. RISE, first launched in 2014, supports 
vulnerable citizens in Burkina Faso and Niger to effectively prepare for and respond to 
environmental and man-made crises, and pursue 
sustainable pathways out of poverty. To achieve this 
goal, the program addresses the underlying causes of 
vulnerability and risk, which lead to a cycle of 
humanitarian crisis and response whenever climatic 
or other shocks occur. USAID’s Office of Food for 
Peace and Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster 
Assistance targets the most vulnerable with lifesaving 
interventions, which include activities such as 
direct food provision, cash transfers, temporary 
employment opportunities, improved access to seeds 
and training in more effective livestock and 
agricultural practices. 

 

At the same time, USAID’s development programs increase sustainable economic well-being 
through increased agricultural productivity, income diversification, and increased access to 
markets and financial services. RISE also seeks to improve health and nutrition and strengthen 
institutions and governance vital to community resilience, such as local authorities, producers and 
community associations, and natural resource management planning. 

 

The RISE II Results Framework is attached to this Scope of Work. This activity will directly 
contribute to RISE II’s Objective 4, particularly to IR 4.3: Improved functioning of national 
resilience-base institutions and IR 4.3.1: Strengthened national resilience policies. The activity 
will also support IR 4.2: Strengthened local civil society and community-based organizations, 
especially IR 4.2.3: Greater transparency and accountability. 

 

This activity will also support the Bridge project currently under design by championing targeted 
security sector policy reforms and strengthening state-citizen dialogue and engagement on 


security matters. The Bridge project will focus development programming in good governance 
and economic growth in targeted geographic areas across the Sahel, but in Niger it will focus on 
the Tillaberi region. These areas are trending in the wrong direction in terms of the spread of 
violent extremism and recurrent humanitarian crises. The Bridge project will include flexible 
implementation mechanisms that can be adjusted as VEO influence is diminished, security 
expanded, and opportunities for longer-term programming are created. Project areas will include: 
1) Local governance and access to justice, and 2) economic livelihood programming. 

 

This activity should form a close partnership with USAID Niger’s Participatory Responsive 
Governance—Principal Activity (PRG-PA). PRG-PA, launched in 2016 and scheduled to end in 
2021, seeks to improve government responsiveness and service delivery in three priority sectors -- 
health, education, and security -- by strengthening the ability of citizens at the local-level to 
identify priorities, find local solutions, and more effectively advocate for their needs. Niger is 
particularly challenged in these sectors. The World Health Organization ranked Niger’s health 
system 170 out of 190 countries in 2015; Niger is currently ranked the least educated country in 
the world; and the country suffers from multiple insurgencies and outbreaks of banditry. In this 
regard, PRG-PA has three target outcomes: 

 

1. Elections are more responsive to priority public needs; 
2. Improved multi-stakeholder (government, CSOs, religious and traditional authorities, 
citizens, etc.) dialogue leads to joint action to address citizen priorities; and, 
3. Capacity of key actors is increased to promote participatory governance. 


 

In addition to the above programming, the USAID Niger Country Office recently ended its six 
year CEPPS/Niger Increased Transparency and Accountability in the Management of Natural 
Resources (NITAP) project. The CEPPS award focused on increasing legislative capacity to 
review and draft new legislation and monitor implementation, with a particular focus on 
extractive industries, electoral reform, human rights, and gender. A new electoral support project, 
currently under design, will support free, fair, and transparent national, regional, and local 
elections in 2021 by building broad-based political consensus on elections and providing 
technical assistance to the new Electoral Commission focused on the establishment of procedures 
and processes to effectively administer future elections. 

 

Alignment with Government of Niger Strategic Interests 

 

Niger has three main strategic frameworks, notably Vision Niger 2035, also called the Strategy 
for Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth (SDDCI); the Economic and Social 
Development Plan (PDES) 2017-2021; and the Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens (3N) Initiative, a 
food security strategy based on agricultural, forestry, and pastoral development. 

 

This activity aligns with the PDES 2017-2021, adopted in September 2017. The PDES 2017-2021 
is the first five year plan that operationalizes the SDDCI Niger 2035, adopted in May 2017. The 
PDES 2017-2021 is also based on the GON’s Renaissance Program 2 articulated and its eight 
priorities: (1) promote cultural renaissance, (2) further consolidating democratic institutions, (3) 
ensure the safety of people and goods, (4) ensure access to water for all, (5) ensure food and 
nutrition security through 3N, (6) develop communication and energy infrastructure, (7) develop 


social sectors: namely, education and health, (8) promote youth employment. Under the PDES 
2017-2021, the GON specifically prioritizes the need to strengthen governance, including the 
transparency and efficiency of public institutions, in order to improve public service delivery. 

 

PRG-GAP must work closely with selected government accountability institutions to potentially 
include the National Parliament’s relevant committees, the Office of the Ombudsman, the Prime 
Minister Office’s Public Policy Analysis and Government Performance Evaluation Unit 
(CAPEG), the High Commission for State Modernization (HCME), sectoral government 
institutions such as Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens (3N), among others. The USAID Niger 
Country Office’s previous engagement with Parliament proved that formal Memorandum of 
Understandings (MOU) between implementing partners and Parliament were instrumental to the 
smooth implementation of activities by clearly delineating roles and responsibilities and taking 
into account the institution’s priorities. USAID supports the continuation of this practice, 
particularly with the key accountability institutions targeted for assistance. 

 

IV. ACTIVITY GOAL, THEORY OF CHANGE, AND ACTIVITY OBJECTIVES WITH 
ILLUSTRATIVE ACTIVITIES 

 

Activity Goal: Civil society more effectively engage the government while key government 
institutions are more effective in their mandate and responsive to citizen needs; thereby, creating 
space and effective mechanisms for public policy reform. 

 

Note: For this Award, the USAID Niger Country Office uses the broadest possible definition of 
civil society --- any organization or individual that is independent of the government. As such, 
civil society includes but is not limited to civil society organizations, media, academia, private 
sector firms, traditional and religious leaders, unions, associations, women and youth groups, and 
citizen activists. 

 

Theory of Change: 

 

IF civil society has the capacity to effectively use social accountability tools3 and approaches 
(transparency, participation, and mobilization) to build effective coalitions for reform and hold 
the government accountable; 

3 Social accountability tools and approaches include but not limited to citizen monitoring and oversight of 
government performance, dissemination of public information access, public complaint and grievance redress 
mechanisms, citizen participation in government planning and budgeting processes, and citizen input into policy 
decisions. 

 

IF targeted horizontal accountability institutions (horizontal accountability) are more effective 
and responsive; and, 

 

IF constructive engagement spaces between citizens and the state are catalyzed for consultations 
and policy dialogue; 


THEN public policy formulation, enforcement, and implementation will improve. 

 

Geographic and Sectoral Focus 

 

The PRG-GAP will address national-level policy reforms. The activity must focus its 
interventions in sectors currently supported by USAID -- resilience and agriculture, humanitarian 
assistance, health, education, countering violent extremism, energy, and water. As such, the 
activity will need to coordinate closely with USAID implementing partners and sectoral 
stakeholders operating throughout the country. The activity’s interventions will primarily be 
performed at the national-level with the Parliament, government ministries and institutions, 
private sector actors, civil society organizations, media, and other actors, most of whom are based 
in the capital of Niamey. 

 

Objectives, Illustrative Activities, and Targets 

 

The following section details the three interconnected activity objectives to include illustrative 
activities, targets, and deliverables for the offeror’s consideration. 

 

● At the award’s inception, the recipient should conduct a Political Economy Analysis 
(PEA) that identifies the underlying interests, incentives and constraints behind weak 
government accountability and poor policy formulation. Understanding political 
competition and the political and economic interests and actions of political elites will, for 
example, give insight on “what” and “who” can convince policy-makers to enact reforms 
with citizen input. The results of the PEA and other assessment should guide work plan 
development and activity implementation. 


 

Objective 1 - Demand Side Objective: Civil society more actively and more effectively hold 
the government accountable and build demand for targeted policy reforms and improved 
government implementation 

 

Activities under this objective will support the establishment of civil society reform coalitions to 
demand reform and hold the government accountable. This objective will also support the scaling 
and institutionalizing of promising solutions to address citizen priority issues. These interventions 
will be focused in priority sectors where USAID is heavily investing, which include resilience and 
agriculture, humanitarian assistance, health, education, countering violent extremism, energy, and 
water. In addition, the recipient should prioritize the engagement with civil society entities 
deemed most capable of advocating for and securing policy reform and enhanced government 
accountability. As such, civil society may be sector-specific; for example, the private sector and 
producer associations in resilience and agriculture sectors or citizen committees and unions in 
social sectors. 

 

In the Nigerien context of heavy reliance on donor funding to provide even basic government 
services, donors’ convening power will be critical to ensuring productive dialogue between civil 
society and the government on critical policy reforms. The recipient should support mechanisms 
and approaches that mobilize donor engagement and programming behind reform efforts 


Illustrative Demand Side Example: 

Onion producer associations in Tahoua are 
becoming strong advocates for their constituents. As 
one example, they entered into an agreement with 
local authorities to collect transit taxes in exchange 
for keeping a portion of the tax revenue. A USAID 
GDA is now helping the associations improve their 
planning and budgeting to better invest the funds 
back into the communities. 

 

Producer associations, however, have not mobilized 
nationally and, as such, their voice is muted beyond 
the local level. Can produce associations be a 
reputable voice for their constituents and promote 
agriculture reform? Can they identify the priority 
needs of their sector and mobilize to effectively 
advocate for change? 

 

supported by the Activity. In doing so, the recipient should find ways to insert civil society more 
effectively in donor coordination and decision-making. 

 

Giving voice to youth, women and 
girls, and marginalized populations is a 
priority for this Activity. With about 
70% of the population under the age of 
thirty, youth represent a major untapped 
voice in society. Niger’s future will 
largely be determined whether the 
youth of today will be given a stake in 
shaping the country’s political, 
economic, and social environment or 
whether they will be excluded. 

 

Women and girls as well are often 
marginalized in decision-making at all 
levels of government and society to the 
detriment of their communities. In 
addition, marginalization of groups 
could result in them turning away from 
the state and towards violent extremist organizations that play to their grievances. It is, therefore, 
critical that their voices are heard and channeled to demand and, ultimately, improve government 
responsiveness. 

 

The recipient should also build on collective action efforts undertaken under the PRG-PA at the 
local-level and expand to new development sectors supported by USAID. Launched in February 
2016, PRG-PA is currently implemented in 24 communes in four regions of Niger but will soon 
add communes in the Tillaberi region. PRG-PA is popularizing collective action approaches and 
creating an enabling environment for proactive citizen participation and feedback to local and 
regional governments. 

 

Illustrative activities under this objective include but are not limited to: 

● Assess the political, legal, and social context for civic engagement; 
● Utilize analytical tools to determine how youth and women organizations can 
improve their ability to engage with their constituents and advocate on their behalf; 
● Strengthen civil society capacity to use social accountability tools; 
● Support civil society advocacy and collective action efforts demanding policy 
reform and/or government action in response to citizen needs (i.e. building 
coalitions for reform); 
● Support civil society oversight of service delivery; 
● Elevate the role of civil society in donor coordination and donor decision-making 
processes; 
● Develop mechanisms and tools that enable civil society to share information, best 
practices, and successes nationwide; 



Illustrative Supply Side Example: 

CAPEG is at the center of GON efforts to improve 
government accountability. Starting last year, all line 
ministries have to send an annual work to plan to 
CAPEG followed by quarterly progress reports and 
an annual performance report. CAPEG also chairs 
portfolio reviews at the ministerial level to review 
and discuss progress towards GON objectives. 

 

CAPEG now wants to collect data from communes 
and regions to triangulate information received from 
the ministries. They also want to establish a set of 
multi-sectoral indicators with targets to help 
determine the effectiveness of GON investments at 
the local level. Can these processes be leveraged to 
make government more transparent and accountable, 
especially if the information is broadly shared? 

 

● Strengthen civil society capacity to use innovative tools and approaches to 
monitoring public service delivery in an environment with lower internet 
penetration and high illiteracy (ICT, social media, petitions, e-government, social 
accountability tools and approaches etc.); and, 
● Strengthen civil society capacity in policy analysis, initiation, formulation, and 
advocacy. 


 

Illustrative results under this objective include but are not limited to: 

● Improved civil society monitoring and oversight of the government; 
● Strengthened civil societies’ capacity to use social accountability tools and 
approaches; 
● Strengthened civil society networks for public service delivery monitoring; 
● Strengthened civil society capacity to initiate, analyze, and advocate for policy 
change; 
● Social accountability, political, legal and social context assessments are available; 
● Increased citizen input to selected laws and policy processes; and, 
● Increased citizen online participation in public affairs. 


 

Objective 2 - Supply Side Objective: Targeted government institutions (e.g. law makers and 
policy makers) are more accountable to citizens and more effective and transparent in their 
operations 

 

Activities under this objective will improve 
horizontal accountability by providing 
support to select national institutions and 
policy change champions to effectively 
perform their role. The activity will provide 
targeted support to two types of national 
institutions: 1) Cross-sectoral policy and/or 
oversight institutions such as Parliament, 
High Authority for State Modernization 
(HCME), Ministry of Finance, Center for 
Policy Analysis (CAPEG), Supreme Audit 
Institution, and the Ombudsman; and, 2) 
Sectoral policy, coordination, and/or 
service delivery institutions such as 3N, 
National Program to Combat Malaria 
(PNLP), and line ministries. 

 

USAID requests that the recipient provide 
support to Parliament to strengthen the 
capacity of committees to transparently formulate, adopt, and oversee the implementation of laws 
relevant to development investments in resilience, security, and other priority sectors. 
Parliamentary committees, while currently controlled by the ruling majority, have displayed the 
desire to improve their public policy formulation and increase their oversight of government 
agencies. 


 

Beyond Parliament, support to cross-sectoral policy and/or oversight institutions should be based 
on their willingness and ability to improve government accountability, institute checks and 
balances in the governance system, and institute transparent and inclusive transparent policy 
reform processes. 

 

Targeted support to sectoral policy, coordination, and/or service delivery institutions should focus 
on ensuring they are more effectively able to fulfil their mandate, lead inclusive coordination 
mechanisms, and be responsive to constituent needs. 

 

Illustrative activities under this objective include but are not limited to: 

● Assist targeted institutions with policies, procedures, and skill sets (including 
leadership and strategic management) to guide operations and enforcement of 
laws, regulations, and policies; 
● Provide technical assistance to targeted institutions to improve their overall 
effectiveness to include their ability to lead coordination mechanisms, monitor 
and evaluate policies and program implementation, and form effective 
partnerships; 
● Targeted training for selected public administrations officials on citizen charter 
awareness and adoption; 
● Support mechanisms for information disclosure, demystification, and 
dissemination to the public (i.e. enhancing citizen awareness and understanding of 
their rights, key law and policies, budget formulation, and government decisionmaking 
processes); 
● Support Parliamentary openness and responsiveness to citizens, civil society, and 
the media (i.e. open committee hearings and requesting broad input during policy 
formulation); 
● Support transparent, participatory budgeting at the national-level; and, 
● Support public complaint and grievance redress mechanisms. 


 

Illustrative results under this objective include but are not limited to: 

● Enhanced national-level institutional capacity to engage civil society on policy 
reform and program delivery; 
● National-level institutions are more able to coordinate donors and other 
stakeholders and monitor and evaluate policy and program effectiveness; 
● Budget formation is more inclusive and transparent by the executive with a 
stronger role for Parliament; 
● Improved parliamentary engagement and dialogue with citizens; 
● Systematic use of citizen charters in the public administration of services; 
● Public information is readily available and accessible to citizen in a clear and 
intelligible way; 
● Increased citizen awareness of outlets for public information; and, 
● Effective complaint and grievance redress mechanisms are available. 


 


Illustrative Bridging Example: 

The 3N initiative is responsible for developing and 
implementing a national food security strategy based on 
agricultural, forestry, and pastoral development. In this 
role, they are responsible for coordinating relevant GON 
programming across relevant ministries and to serve as a 
focal point for donors and civil society operating in the 
food security space. 

 

3N, however, does not have the capacity to effectively 
coordinate such a complex strategy with numerous and 
diverse actors despite showing a want to do so. Can 
improved mechanisms be developed that bring together 
3N and civil society to jointly discuss and develop food 
security-related policy and reforms? Can 3N and civil 
society jointly review and assess progress against the 
strategy? Can 3N and civil society join forces to push for 
reform and then monitor its implementation? 

Objective 3 - Bridging the Demand and Supply Side: Constructive engagement spaces 
between citizens, civil society, and the state to identify and implement targeted priority 
reforms are created and strengthened 

 

Activities under this objective will catalyze the institutionalization of constructive engagement 
mechanisms and spaces in which the GON, donors, and civil society to analyze constraints to 
economic development and improved security, identify priority reforms to address those 
constraints, and engage in participatory, transparent policy reform processes. 

 

In order for the engagement spaces 
to be effective, however, USAID’s 
past experience with policy reform 
in Niger shows that there first must 
be strong political will for reform 
and significant pressure from 
credible civil society voices. 
USAID, for example, supported 
transparent, inclusive reform 
efforts related to anti-corruption 
and electoral reform in recent 
years. These efforts were led by 
the GON but included extensive 
input from political parties and 
civil society. 

 

These transparent processes 
resulted in the drafting of strong, 
consensus legislation. In each 
instance, the GON amended the 
legislation at the last moment to weaken it or consolidate authorities immediately before the 
legislation went to Parliament. Without any debate, the Parliament (80% majority) voted in the 
GON’s version of the legislation. 

 

The missing element in these other instances of failed policy reform was the lack of an effective 
coalition of voices to hold the government accountable not adhering to the results of the 
transparent policy reform processes. With that being said, USAID is concerned over the closing 
space for state-citizen dialogue and, as such, prioritizes mechanisms for citizens to more 
effectively voice their demands and needs directly to those in authority. 

 

Illustrative activities under this objective include but are not limited to: 

● Support studies and analysis pertaining to citizen priority issues, laws, policy 
initiation and implementation, and government performance; 
● Support Parliament and relevant GON institutions to open parliamentary 
committee proceedings to citizen input and feedback; 
● Support sectoral and issue based political economy analysis to inform policy 
reforms; 



● Support development practitioner sharing forums (donors, INGO and NGOs, 
academia, think tanks, and GON) where development practitioners and academics 
detail best practices to public and private goods and service delivery and present 
policy implications for their adoption, upscaling, and sustainability; and, 
● Support sectoral and cross-cutting policy forums for policy analysis, initiation, 
formulation, and advocacy. 


 

Illustrative results under this objective include but are not limited to: 

● Increased support of annual sectoral or cross-cutting policy forums that bring civil 
society, development practitioners and decision and policy makers and lawmakers 
together to present and review citizens priorities and related policy initiatives; 
● Policy makers and lawmakers routinely seek input from civil society during policy 
formulation; 
● Selected Parliament committee hearings and Parliament plenary sessions are open 
to citizens and civil society; 
● Mechanisms and space for citizen, civil society, and state dialogue on policy 
reform and service delivery are strengthened or created; and, 
● Sectoral and cross-cutting policy forums to support the initiation, advocacy 
adoption, and implementation of laws and policies critical to better development 
outcomes are sponsored by USAID and other donors. 


 

V. ILLUSTRATIVE INDICATORS 

 

The following are illustrative indicators to measure progress towards Activity objectives. These 
indicators are illustrative only and should be refined by Applicants in proposal development and 
then in collaboration with the USAID Niger Country Office at the start of the Activity. The 
recipient, however, should include the relevant indicators from the U.S. Foreign Assistance 
Framework, specifically those related to election administration and institution building. Please 
see Section XI: Activity Monitoring, Evaluating, and Learning for more details. 

 

Activity purpose: Citizens and civil society more effectively engage the government while 
key government institutions are more effective in their mandate and responsive to citizen 
needs; thereby, creating space and mechanism for public policy reform 

 

● Percentage of Nigerien who perceive improvements in government accountability on 
policy reform 


 

Objective 1: Civil society more actively and more effectively hold the government 
accountable and build demand for targeted policy reforms and improved government 
implementation 

 

● Number of demand-side initiatives that have been incorporated systematically into 
national policies; 
● Percentage of citizens perceiving value in participating in policy formulation processes; 
● Number of civil society organizations using social accountability tools and approaches; 



● Number of civil society organizations trained in policy analysis, initiation and advocacy; 
and, 
● Number of civil society organizations using innovative tools to monitor public service 
delivery. 


 

Objective 2: Targeted government institutions (e.g. law makers and policy makers) are 
more accountable to citizens and more effective and transparent in their operations 

 

● Satisfaction rate on services provided by agencies subscribing the Citizens’ Charter 
Program (as measured by annual percent increase in overall satisfaction rate in citizens’ 
report cards); 
● Number of executive oversight actions taken by the legislature receiving USG assistance; 
● Number of laws or regulations to address sectoral constraints and improve operating 
environment for development investments with USG technical assistance; 
● Percentage of citizens using grievance redress mechanisms who report that they are 
satisfied with their case treatment; 
● Number of government services adopting citizen charters; 
● Percentage of citizens perceiving positive change in access to public information; 
● Number of public interest fora held by the parliament; 
● Targeted government institutions capacity index; 
● Percentage of citizen perceiving greater transparency and access to public information; 
and, 
● Number of functioning grievance redress mechanisms supported by USG assistance. 


 

Objective 3: Bridging the Demand and Supply Side: Constructive engagement spaces 
between citizens, civil society, and the state to identify and implement targeted priority 
reforms are created and strengthened 

 

● Number of citizen networks engaging in issues of social accountability related to budgets, 
public expenditures, and service delivery; 
● Number of multi-stakeholder policy forums held in which state institutions obtain input 
into required reforms and/or best practices for scaling; 
● Number of constructive engagement forums bringing SI, GON and development 
practitioners together for policy dialogue; 
● Number of parliament committee hearings open to citizens and civil society; 
● Number of mechanism and space for citizen, civil society, and state dialogue on policy 
reform and service delivery strengthened; 
● Number of sectoral and cross-cutting policy forums sponsored by USAID and other 
donors; 
● Number of studies conducted to inform policy reform; 
● Number of best practice forums held; and, 
● Number of policy forum held to assess and discuss about policy reform 


 

VI. GENDER 


PRG-GAP will address national-level policy reforms to improve the operating environment for 
USAID’s major investments in sectors such as food security, resilience, agriculture, health, 
education, and countering violent extremism. The RISE II program is the most significant USAID 
investment to which this activity will contribute. The RISE II design included gender 
considerations incorporated in sectoral analysis, project evaluations, and research efforts. As part 
of RISE II, USAID is funding an ethnographic study on how women in Niger conceive of, and 
define, women’s empowerment. The study is expected to conclude in late summer 2018. This 
ethnographic study is in response to USAID’s observation that improving women’s standing in 
target communities has been one of the most challenging aspects of USAID programming, and 
that we need to adjust our approach to better match local cultural and religious perspectives. 

 

The RISE II gender analysis identified gender gaps to include several with policy-level 
implications. Based on this analysis and USAID learning from program implementation, the 
following issues need to be addressed: 

 

● Harmonization is required between human rights and gender legislation and international 
conventions protecting women. Niger ratified many international conventions to include 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in 1999 
and the optional Protocol on Violence Against Women in 2004. Niger also signed but has 
not yet ratified The African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights on the Rights of 
Women in Africa. However, the national legal framework pertaining to women rights and 
protection is not fully aligned with these international conventions. 

 

● Promoting women self-agency through access to education is critical to reducing 
inequality. The lack of or unequal access to education represents a lifetime impediment to 
fully attaining a productive and enriching life for women. Development efforts should 
support young girls’ basic education and remedial education (i.e. literacy) to ensure a 
leveled playing ground for all. USAID learned through recent programming that most 
often resilience programs are targeted at the most vulnerable citizens but, yet, this type of 
programming is more beneficial to educated populations. The illiterate population, often 
the most vulnerable, is missing the basic ability to critically analyze, retain, and put into 
practice valuable learning that ensures long lasting economic and social benefits. 

 

● The underlying sources of gender inequality lay in discriminatory traditional beliefs and 
practices and that this discrimination is often translated into modern laws and policies 
when an appropriate gender lens is not applied. 


 

Given the above, policy reform efforts under this activity should analyze and address gender gaps 
in existing policies and ensure that a gender lens is applied to new policy formulation processes. 
More broadly, promoting gender equality and advancing the status of women and girls is vital to 
achieving USAID’s development objectives. It is USAID policy that all awards mainstream and 
integrate gender into their interventions. Therefore, the recipient will be required to demonstrate 
compliance with USAID Policy ADS 205, and should explicitly state how this activity supports 
the gender policies and strategies of the United States and the GON. 

 

VII. YOUTH 


The USAID Youth in Development Policy and the Positive Youth Development approach 
emphasize the centrality of youth participation to achieving development outcomes. This activity 
will provide youth with the opportunity to shape existing laws and policies often detrimental to 
youth development through active participation in policy analysis, initiation, and adoption. 
Positive Youth Development principles should be fully integrated into activity implementation. 
The activity should prioritize the inclusion of youth associations and other youth groups in 
demand side activities to include the creation and strengthening of government accountability 
mechanisms. Youth participation should also be prioritized in policy formulation, adoption, and 
implementation conducted under this activity. The activity will, in fact, provide a unique 
opportunity for USAID to shape national sectoral policies with a youth development lens. 

 

USAID is currently co-funding a countrywide youth assessment with UNICEF. The assessment 
is analyzing the challenges and constraints faced by youth and to rethink the relevance and 
effectiveness of policies and programs intended for them. The assessment final report with 
findings and recommendations is expected by the end of 2018. The results of this assessment will 
be used to inform this and all other USAID projects under design or implementation. 

 

VIII. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATIONS, AND PARTNERSHIPS 

 

The USAID Niger Country Office is placing an increased emphasis on the need to identify and 
apply Science, Technology, Innovation and Partnership (STIP) to overcome the significant 
development challenges that exist in Niger. In a country with over 70% illiteracy, 70% of 
households food insecure, less than 4% rural electrification, weak government structures, and an 
underdeveloped private sector, there is a strong need to find innovative approaches and harness 
technology to achieve development outcomes, make investments more cost-effective, and bring 
ground-breaking innovations to scale. Potential examples of STIP within the context of this 
activity include leveraging technology to build civil society demand for reform, innovative 
approaches and partnerships to monitor government performance, and innovative systems to 
improve government transparency and effectiveness. The recipient should integrate STIP 
approaches, to the extent possible, in activity design, implementation, and learning. 

 

IX. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERFORMANCE 

 

Role of the Implementer: 

 

The recipient will have responsibility to coordinate and oversee all engagement and activities 
implemented under the award. These management responsibilities include technical direction, 
oversight and monitoring of sub-awardees. A permanent presence in the capital city, Niamey, will 
be required during the performance period. 

 

USAID is designating two expatriate positions as Key Personnel; a Chief of Party (COP), and a 
Policy Reform Adviser. The COP will have responsibility for overall management of the award. 
Due to the importance of Objective 1 activities and building effective coalitions for reform, the 
recipient needs to ensure that the COP and activity staff have the experience and expertise to 
implement innovative civil society mobilization and strengthening activities in a challenging 
environment. The Policy Reform Adviser will be the lead technical person and will provide 


technical assistance to government institutions under Objective 2 and will play a key role in 
building constructive engagement spaces under Objective 3. 

 

Guided by the work plan, the recipient may need to utilize international and regional technical 
experts (Short Term Technical Assistance – STTA) across all three Activity objectives. To the 
extent possible, the recipient should seek to utilize Nigerien and regional organizations or experts 
capable of providing needed technical assistance or implementing key activities as either partners, 
STTA, or sub-grantees. 

 

Role of Niger Field Office: 

 

The USAID Niger Country Office will nominate an Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) 
from its DRG team to the Agreement Officer (AO) for designation. The AOR will lead and 
manage this Activity to include maintaining regular communication with the Recipient field staff, 
monitoring training and other technical assistance provided by the recipient, and engaging with 
the GON and other election stakeholders in support of the Activity. 

 

Role of the Sahel Regional Office: 

 

This Award will be administered by the Regional Agreement Office in USAID/Senegal and all 
major decisions regarding this funding instrument will come from that office. 

 

X. COLLABORATING, LEARNING, AND ADAPTING 

 

This activity is expected to contribute to the USAID Niger Country Office’s commitment to a 
multi-faceted Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) approach to development. The CLA 
approach is based on the understanding that development efforts yield more effective results if 
they are coordinated and collaborative, test promising, continuously identify new approaches in a 
rapid, yet targeted manner to generate improvements and efficiencies, and build on what works 
and eliminate what doesn‘t. CLA creates the conditions for fostering broader development 
success by: 

 

● Collaborating: Facilitating collaboration internally and with external stakeholders to 
promote increasingly national-led socio-economic development; enhancing existing 
stakeholder engagement into learning platforms; and coordinating with other USG- or 
other complementary activities to ensure complementarity and reduce overlap, while also 
facilitating learning among activities (to reduce the collective cost while enhancing shared 
results faster); 
● Learning: Generating and feeding new learning, innovations, and performance information 
back into the program strategy to inform program management, design, policy dialogue 
opportunities and funding allocations; creating pauses for reflection within the activity 
implementation scheme, engaging stakeholders for shared ‘learning moments;’ conducting 
analytical review of existing and/or new evidence that may support or contradict common 
understanding; 
● Adapting: Translating learning (from within the implementation experience or external 
sources) and considering changing conditions, along the lines of the risks, assumptions 



and game changers, into strategic and programmatic adjustments. This could include 
adjusting work plans to account for contextual shifts or tacit learning from a team’s 
experience, while clearly and explicitly capturing and sharing the rationale for adjustments 
along the way. 


 

All of the three CLA dimensions are equally important and should be taken into account. 
Objective 3, particularly stresses on catalyzing the institutionalization of constructive engagement 
spaces where donors, CSOs, academia, and think-tanks collaborate on citizen priority issues, legal 
and policy formulation and implementation, and government performance. These constructive 
engagement spaces, for example could include standardized processes whereby government and 
lawmakers seek international NGOs, CSOs, academia, and think tank contributions on policy and 
law drafts. 

 

The Activity’s monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) system should use USAID's CLA 
principles to effectively collaborate with other implementing partners and integrate real time 
monitoring and learning back into the strategy and implementation and ensure that knowledge is 
shared with the broader RISE and host country community. 

XI. ACTIVITY MONITORING, EVALUATING, AND LEARNING 

 

The recipient will be responsible for devising and implementing a Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning Plan (AMELP), including appropriate indicators linked to each anticipated result, targets 
for each indicator, a process to collect data on program performance in a timely and cost-effective 
manner, and a system for analyzing and using this data to consistently improve activity 
performance. 

 

Furthermore, the recipient will be required to monitor the context. Context monitoring is the 
monitoring of local conditions that may directly affect implementation and performance or 
external factors that may indirectly affect implementation and performance. 

 

XII. SUSTAINABILITY 

 

USAID’s goal, at the end of the activity period, is for interventions to be ‘partially sustainable.4’ 
Increasing civil society engagement on government accountability and public policy reform is a 
long term endeavor beyond the lifespan of this activity. Ensuring full sustainability of results will 
require further engagements of civil society and key accountability institutions as well as 
sustained donor coordination mechanism that will commit to supporting constructive engagement 
spaces between the GON and civil society. The recipient should, however, prioritize institutions, 
engagement spaces, coordination mechanisms, and other interventions with the most likelihood of 
continuing and even expanding their mandate and activities beyond the life of the activity. 

4 Based on USAID/Senegal’s sustainability analysis framework. 

 

Some activity interventions will result in a better legal and regulatory framework for the social 
accountability environment and improve the policy environment in different sectors. These types 


of results linked to policy reform and improved legal frameworks have good chances to be fully 
sustained. 

 

Most importantly, however, is the need to increase the capacity of civil society to include on 
advocacy, coalition building, analysis, utilization of social accountability tools, and IT platforms 
that are sustainable beyond the life of this activity. To accomplish this objective, the recipient 
should include civil society not just as beneficiaries but as local Activity partners. As Activity 
partners, civil society will learn by doing and also place them in a leadership role in policy reform 
efforts with the GON. To the extent possible, the recipient should take a phased approach in 
which local partners gradually take over leadership of key aspects of the Activity. 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $7,000,000.00 in total USAID funding over a three (3) year period. USAID also 
realized that the objectives and illustrative activities under this Award are ambitious in scope. As 
such, the leveraging of and coordination with other USAID programs and donor initiatives as well 
as the prioritization of activities within annual work plans will be essential to the success of this 
Award. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is three years. The estimated start date will be on/or about 
May 31, 2019. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

Award under this NOFO will be a cooperative agreement. Potential applicants should note that 

USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit to the recipients under assistance instruments. 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID will be substantially involved in the implementation of 
this Activity. The intended purpose of the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
involvement during the implementation of the program is to assist the recipient in achieving the 
supported objectives. It is expected that the Agreement Officer will delegate the following 
approvals to the AOR: 

 

(a) Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 

USAID will approve annual work plans and the life-of-project exit strategy, and any subsequent 
revisions. 

 

(b) Approval of Specified Key Personnel 

USAID may designate as key personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. USAID’s policy limits this to a reasonable number of 
positions, generally no more than five positions or five percent of Recipient employees working 
under the award, whichever is greater. 

 

(c) Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 

When the Recipient's successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 

USAID's technical knowledge, the AO may authorize the collaboration or joint participation of 
USAID and the Recipient on the program. The AO may include appropriate levels of substantial 
involvement such as the following: 

 

1) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the program 
will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the Recipient. USAID may 



participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees must only deal 
with programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative matters. 


 

2) Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards. 2 CFR 200.308 already requires 
the Recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting 
out of any work under an award. This is generally limited to approving work by a third 
party under the agreement. 


 

3) Approval of the Recipient's Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 
(AMELP). 


 

4) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the program 
description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. 


 

(d) Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity –construction is not 
authorized under this award. 

 

An award shall be made only when the Agreement Officer makes a positive determination that the 
Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management competence in 
planning and carrying out assistance programs and that it will practice mutually agreed upon 
methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. For organizations that 
are new to USAID, or organizations with outstanding audit findings, it may be necessary to 
perform a pre-award survey in accordance with ADS 303.3.9 and ADS 591.3.4.2. 

 

4. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937, 
defined as the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. Procurement of 
vehicles and pharmaceuticals and other restricted commodities are subject to the limitations in 22 
CFR 228, ADS 312, and ADS 310 and may require a waiver or Agreement Officer’s approval. 

 

For accurate identification of prohibited sources, please refer to 22 CFR 228 and Automated 

Directive System (ADS) 310 entitled “Source and Nationality Requirements for Procurement of 

Commodities and Services Financed by USAID. 

 

 5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the NIGER 
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY AND POLICY REFORM ACTIVITY which is 
authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of the award 
through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility 
for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program 


objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

6. Selection of Instrument 


 

1) During the planning phase, the USAID Niger Country Office (USAID/Niger) spent 
considerable time researching the market and identifying potential partners capable of 
successfully implementing this broad-based Activity. USAID/Niger determined that there 
were no local organizations both private sector and non-governmental capable of 
implementing this initiative due to a lack of organizational capacity or not being well 
positioned to provide support to both government institutions and civil society. The 
research pointed to a number of international and U.S. non-governmental organizations 
that had sufficient technical expertise and experience to implement such a wide ranging 
Activity. 


 

2) The principal purpose of the recommended instrument (cooperative agreement) is to 
transfer a thing of value (Federal Financial Assistance) to the recipient to carry out a 
public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by law (the Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended, and other authorities as provided in annual appropriation). The 
selection of assistance by the USAID/Niger Country Office best suites the transaction 
contemplated, and is the appropriate legal instrument to create the intended relationship 
(grantor-grantee) between the Agency and the recipient, for the Activity, rather than a 
buyer-seller relationship for the purchase of property or services. Substantial involvement 
is expected between the Agency and the recipient when carrying out the activity 
contemplated in the cooperative agreement. The selection is also consistent with the 
discretion and the flexibility afforded to the Agency by the FGCAA, FAA, and ADS 
Chapter 304. 


 

3) The primary goal of this Activity is to create space and effective mechanisms for 
improved public policy reform. This ambitious goal will be achieved by focusing on 
building coalitions for reform that both demand government action to address key sectoral 
constraints and create mechanisms to hold the government accountable (demand side). At 
the same time, this activity will provide targeted assistance to national institutions willing 
and able to champion reform supported by civil society (supply). The demand and supplyside 
efforts will be bridged via the creation of mechanisms and spaces for multistakeholder, 
policy dialogue. These approaches will be coupled with intensive donor 
coordination to catalyze critical policy reforms relevant to the successful implementation 
of major USAID development interventions. The totality of this activity should result in 
enhanced government accountability and responsiveness to citizen and sectoral needs and 
usher in an improved policy framework. 


 

4) This is a new activity, and therefore is not a change in instrument type. 


 

 [END OF SECTION B] 

 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Qualified U.S. and non-U.S. organizations (other than those from foreign policy restricted 
countries) are eligible to apply under this NOFO. Potential for-profit Applicants should note that, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.400(g), profit, which is any amount in excess of allowable direct 
and indirect costs, is not an allowable cost for Recipients of USAID assistance awards, and cannot 
be part of the activity budget. However, the prohibition against profit does not apply to 
procurement contracts made under the assistance instrument when the Recipient procures goods 
and services in accordance with the Procurement Standards found in 2 CFR 200.317 to 326. 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (possibly including a pre-award survey) by the 
Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective Recipient has the 
necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or 
ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the 
terms and conditions of the award. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

No cost-sharing (matching) is required. 

 

3. Other 

 

Organizations may submit only one application under this NOFO. 

All applications received by the deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness and programmatic 
merit in accordance with the specifications outlined in Section D below. Applications should 
respond directly to the terms, conditions, specifications and provisions of this NOFO (including 
all portions of the program description). Applications that do not meet the requirements of this 

NOFO will not be considered for award. 

 

[END OF SECTION C] 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Primary: 

Name: Abdullahi Sadiq 

Title: Agreement Specialist 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: asadiq@usaid.gov 

Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

Alternate: 

Name: Yves Kore 

Title: Regional Agreement Officer 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: ykore@usaid.gov 

 Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the email address of the 
primary and alternate agency contacts above with a copy to Aminata Diallo 
at amdiallo@usaid.gov and Hamed Cisse at hcisse@usaid.gov no later than the date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Any information given to a prospective Applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an 
amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack 
of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

• Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 



• Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
• Program name; 
• Notice of Funding Opportunity number; and 
• Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations), per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

a) Technical applications may not exceed 35 pages, excluding attachments and annexes, and 
must be on 8.5 by 11 inch or A4 size paper, single spaced, 12-point font with one-inch 
margins on all sides and tabs for ease of reference to each section, including consecutive 
page numbers, date of submission, and Applicant’s name on a header or footer.; 


 

b) If applications contain text boxes, they must also be in no less than 10-point font, as to not 
unduly interfere with readability; 


 

c) The technical application must be in a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate; 


 

d) The Cover letter, Cover page, Tabs/dividers, Table of Contents, Acronym list, Executive 
Summary, and Attachment do not count against the 35-page limitation. Any page in the 
technical application that contains a table, chart, or graph, not otherwise excluded above, 
is subject to the page limitation; 


 

e) All information from appendices must be referenced in the technical application and 
summarized and included in the attach section. All critical information from 
appendices/attachment clearly identified and summarized in the technical application will 
be evaluated as part of the basis of award; 


 

f) Additional documentation beyond the 35-page limit and the referenced attachments will 
not be read or evaluated by USAID; 


 


g) Budget Narrative: Accompanying budget notes/narrative must explain the basis of all unit 
costs in each line item. The explanation must identify the factors upon which each 
estimate is based and show the arithmetic in reaching the cost figure; and 


 

h) The budget should be submitted in MS Excel format (software versions 2003 or newer). 
The Excel spreadsheet cells must be “unprotected”, and must not be zipped to allow 
USAID to view all formulas and calculations by line item. See Annex #1 for a sample 
Budget Format. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should 
retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor 
considered/ may be considered at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. Applicants must retain 
proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date 
and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to the contacts provided in Section D.1. Please do 
not submit applications through the Grants.gov website. Email submissions must include the 
NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application 
sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the 
technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. 
"No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email 
should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, 
Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once 
unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 


 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Senegal Mission cannot 
guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 10MB per email. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The application must contain information that demonstrates the Applicant’s understanding of the 
program description and must be prepared in such a manner as to enable the review committees to 
make a thorough evaluation and arrive at a sound determination of whether the application 
responds to the NOFO. 

 

Unnecessarily elaborate brochures or other presentations beyond those sufficient to present a 
complete and effective application in response to this NOFO are not desired and may be 
construed as an indication of the Applicant’s lack of cost consciousness. Elaborate art work and 
expensive visual or other presentation aids are neither necessary nor wanted. 

 

Sample format for presentation of technical approach is as follows: 

 

a) Cover Letter; 
b) Table of Contents; 
c) Executive Summary; 
d) Technical Approach; 
e) Key Personnel and Staffing Plan; 
f) Collaboration and Coordination; 
g) Adaptability; 
h) Management Plan and Institutional Capability; and 
i) Attachments as applicable: 
• Draft Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan; 
• Draft Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan; 
• Organizational Chart(s); 
• Staffing Plan including skills matrix; 
• Key Personnel Position Descriptions; 
• Key Personnel CV/Resumes; and 
• Past Performance Information 


 

NOTE: Applicants will determine the type of information to be submitted as attachments to their 
technical application in response to the instructions provided in the NOFO. The list provided 
above is not all-inclusive or exhaustive. 

 

a) Cover Letter (does not count against the 35-page limit) 



 

In addition to Section D.3 above, Include the Applicant’s name submitting the application and the 
organization’s DUNS number. Major sub-awardees (hereafter referred to as “subs”) must be 
clearly identified, along with their DUNS numbers; major subs are defined as those expected to 
perform at least 20 percent of the Applicant’s total proposed budget, or a prominent part of the 
technical effort. Include a contact person for the application, including his/her name (both typed 
and signed), title or position with the organization, address, telephone, and email address. Also 
state whether the contact person is the authorized representative with authority to negotiate the 
award, and if not, that person should also be clearly identified. 

 

b) Table of Contents (does not count against the 35-page limit) 


 

The Technical Application will contain a Table of Contents with page numbers indicated. 

 

c) Executive Summary (not to exceed 2 pages, does not count against the 35-page 
limit) 


 

The executive summary must describe the basic elements of the technical application. This 
section must include a problem statement, goals and objectives and summarize the key elements 
of the Applicant’s strategy, approach, methodologies, management, personnel and 
implementation plan. 

 

d) Technical Approach (no more than 15 pages) 


 

• Display an understating of Niger’s political economy, and how the political settlement shapes 
the space for governance reforms. 
• Reflects learning from USAID and other donor efforts to improve public policy formation and 
strengthen governance systems in Niger, and to maximize the use and adaptation of existing 
resources and donor investments. 
• Well-articulated, innovative, and sound approach to building effective coalitions for reform 
and to hold the government accountable. 
• Well-articulated, innovative, and sound approach to expanding constructive engagement 
spaces between citizens and the state. 
• Well-articulated, innovative, and sound approach to making government institutions more 
effective and responsive. 
• Well-defined approach to embedding political economy analysis and CLA principles into 
program management and implementation. 
• Appropriate outreach plan and use of media for different target audiences. 
• Describe innovative approaches to enabling local actors to lead the development process. 
• Clear articulation of why the proposed approach is expected to yield more sustainable 
development outcomes compared to existing or past initiatives and practices. 


 

e) Key Personnel and Staffing Plan (no more than 5 pages) 


 

• The extent to which proposed personnel complement each other and are appropriate for the 
proposed activities. 



• Key personnel will be evaluated on the basis of: dynamism and ability to lead and form 
coalitions and partnerships; ability to think creatively and find innovative solutions to 
complex problem sets; management experience with similar programs; professional and 
academic background; demonstrated experience mobilizing and strengthening civil society; 
demonstrated experience facilitating government-civil society dialogue; evidence of 
commitment to the GAP approach; and experience using political economy analysis or at least 
thinking and working politically. 
• The applicant’s approach to pro-actively seeking out qualified women and youth. 
• Applicant should be committed to utilizing national staff wherever possible. One way to 


promote sustainability of results is to develop the professional capacity of national staff. 
Coaching and training should be part of an integrated professional development strategy for 
national staff during program implementation. 

 

f) Collaboration and Coordination (no more than 5 pages) 


 

• Effective, innovative strategy for identifying, engaging, and mobilizing a broad range of 
Nigerien civil society actors. 
• Process for partnering with other USAID implementing partners and donors whereby they 
take the lead in identifying the demand/priorities and GAP supports their efforts to improve 
public policy and the operating environment in each sector. 
• Effective approach to fostering and measuring Nigerien government leadership and ownership 
of improved public policy and participatory decision-making. 
• Clear and contextually appropriate approach to include women and youth as partners in 
programming, not just as beneficiaries. 


 

g) Adaptability (no more than 5 pages) 


 

• The extent to which the proposed technical approach is adaptable and can be adjusted based 
on changing political situation, operating environment, and policy reform priorities. 
• A strong learning agenda that tracks progress against intended results, identifies learning 
opportunities, and adapts programming to anticipate and respond to challenges and 
opportunities that arise. 
• Description of how learning generated through proposed activities, including through failure 
and iteration, will inform future programming and contribute to improved policy formation 
and responsive governance. 
• Description of how changing staffing needs will be defined and recruited over the life of 
GAP. 


 

h) Management Plan and Institutional Capability (no more than 5 pages) 


 

• Demonstrated capability and capacity to perform the work of similar scope and size based on 
managerial resources, expertise, and experience. 



• Proposed administrative and home office support management structure and financial 
controls. 
• The quality of the management and staffing plan and the extent to which the plan properly 
delineates the processes, structure, and approach to staffing. 
• The Applicants’s approach to staff development. 


 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements); 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s); 














 

The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF- 
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances; 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 


 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” document found 
at http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 


 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 


 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Pre-award Terms Incorporated by Reference: 














 

The following pre-awards terms found 
in https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mba.pdf are incorporated into 
this NOFO by reference: 

1) Branding Strategy – Assistance; 

2) Marking Plan – Assistance; and 

3) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

 

e) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must 
contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The Applicant must 
ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as 
Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to 
support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

• Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template; 


 

• Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E; and 


 

• Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 



 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the Applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 
of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used 
and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the Applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental 
costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if 
any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, 
condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – Not applicable. 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 



applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200.414. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide 
the applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved NICRA and the associated 
disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the 
contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a 
provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s 
Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA. 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs, but may not be double 
charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected must be 
used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to 
negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 
200.414(f) for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO. 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one 



program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

f) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
Applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

g) Approval of Subawards 

 

The Applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the Applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization; 
• DUNS Number; 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list; 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM); 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list; 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred; 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b); and 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

h) Dun and Bradstreet, and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 


that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM 
www.sam.gov); 
and 
before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient ( 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

i) History of Performance 

 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent (not to exceed 3 years) history of 
performance on any cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements (not to 
exceed 5) involving similar or related programs as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
Applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 


review of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a 
pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

Applicants should use the format provided in Annex #6: Past Performance Information of 
the NOFO to document the detailed information as requested. The completed forms should 
be included in the application’s appendix/annex. 

 

j) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

Pursuant to ADS 303.3.6.3.f and ADS 320.3.1.2, the apparently successful applicant will be 
requested to submit a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan that will have to be successfully 
negotiated before a cooperative agreement will be awarded. These plans shall be prepared in 
accordance with the guidance in ADS 320.3.1.2, 2 CFR 700.16 and the references therein. ADS 

Chapter 320 sections concerning "assistance" apply to this NOFO. ADS Chapter 320 sections 
concerning "acquisition" do not apply to this NOFO. ADS Chapter 320 can be found on the 

USAID website: http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/320. 

 

It is a federal statutory and regulatory requirement that all USAID programs, projects, activities, 
public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under a grant or 
cooperative agreement or other assistance award or sub award, must be marked appropriately with 
the USAID Identity. USAID requires the submission of a revised Branding Strategy and a 
Marking Plan as part of this Award. For more information, see: 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding/assistance.html 

 

The recipient should acknowledge USAID as the donor both verbally and in writing in all activity 
documents and media, as well as during meetings, public events, and technical assistance sessions 
with government stakeholders, local partners, and beneficiaries. This includes radio and TV spots, 
billboards and other signage, and documents/materials developed by the activity. 

 

The recipient will be required to submit the following communications materials on a timeline 
specified by USAID, using guidance explained in USAID’s Graphic Standards Manual and 
Partner Co-Branding Guide. This list is not exhaustive, but rather an illustrative list that outlines 
the minimum communications requirements for all awards. 

 

● A Communications Strategy submitted and completed with feedback from the USAID 
Development Outreach and Communications Advisor (DOC) and revised annually as 
the program matures; 
● Activity factsheet completed with feedback from the USAID AOR, which should be 
updated annually or when appropriate; 
● Two success stories per quarter, with relevant photos as part of the quarterly and 
annual reporting; 
● A pool of selected high-resolution photos showcasing program milestones, 
achievements, and beneficiaries; and, 
● One success story video per year submitted with full involvement of the USAID DOC 
and AOR. 


 


The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award. 

 

Therefore, the Branding Strategy and Marking Plan must not be included with the original 
application but will be provided only after a written request by the Agreement Officer. However, 
the cost of Branding and Marking must be included in the Cost Application. USAID does not 
intend to make an award without an approved Branding Strategy and Marking Plan. 

 

In addition, Applicants are required to read and understand the Pre-award Terms found in ADS 
303mba entitled “Branding Strategy – Assistance” and “Marking Plan – Assistance”. Click this 
link to access the Pre-award 
Terms: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mba.pdf 

 

k) Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

USAID intends to award a single Cooperative Agreement from this NOFO. However, USAID 
reserves the right to make more than one award or no award if determined to be in the best 
interest of the Government. Each application submitted compliant with the terms of this NOFO 
will be reviewed according to the process set forth below. 

 

Committee members will examine the logic, feasibility and appropriateness of the technical 
approach, including responsiveness to cross-cutting themes, indicators and anticipated 
development results or impacts; quality and availability of personnel in response to stated 
qualifications or requirements; and several institutional factors. 

 

After evaluations have been completed, the Agreement Officer (AO), considering the SC review 
and the cost evaluation, will then make the final selection. USAID may engage in discussions or 
negotiations with the Apparently Successful Applicant regarding any matter to be covered in the 
final technical and cost application. USAID may also award without further discussions with the 
selected Applicant. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

Evaluation Criteria #1: Technical Approach (35 pts) 

 

Extent to which the applicant provides a sound, and innovative technical approach that is tailored 
to the problem set and takes into consideration the institutional, legal, and cultural contexts 
defined in the Program Description. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #2: Personnel (20 pts) 

 

Extent to which the proposed personnel are dynamic and demonstrate strong communication, 
technical, and managerial competencies to successfully implement the activity. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #3: Collaboration and Coordination (20 pts) 


Extent to which the proposed plan provides a sound approach to leveraging and forming 
partnerships with USAID sectoral implementing partners, investment of other donors, and 
relevant local actors. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #4: Adaptability (15 pts) 

 

Extent to which the proposed plan is realistic, and also provides for flexible and adaptable 
programming to take advantage of windows of opportunities and ensure timely programmatic 
adjustments due to changes in the operating environment. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #5: Management Approach and Institutional Capacity (10 pts) 

 

Extent to which the applicant convincingly demonstrates how its management approach and 
institutional capability will lead to successful and effective implementation of the proposed 
technical approach. 

 

a) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a preaward 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

These documents may be accessed through the internet as follows: 

 

• 2 CFR 200: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 


 

• 2 CFR 700: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 


 

• ADS 303: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf 


 

• Standard Provisions for U.S., Nongovernmental 
Recipients: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303maa.pdf 


 

• Standard Provisions for non-U.S. Nongovernmental 
Recipients: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mab.pdf 


 

See Section H, Annex 2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to awards 
resulting from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

• Financial Reporting: 


 

The recipient shall account for expenditures for activities carried out to ensure funds are used for 
their intended purposes. Financial reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 200.327. 

 


(a) Quarterly Report: The recipient will submit an SF 425, the Federal Financial Report, via 
electronic format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov) within 30 calendar days following the end of each quarter of the 
United States Government fiscal year. A copy of this form shall be simultaneously submitted to 
the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and the USAID/Senegal Office of Financial 
Management. 

 

(b) Final Report: The recipient will submit within 90 calendar days following the estimated 
completion date of this award the original and three (3) copies of the final Federal Financial 
Reports (SF-425) to: (a) USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMP-LOC Unit; (b) the Agreement 
Officer, (c) Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The electronic version of the final SF 
425 will be submitted to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov) in accordance with paragraph (a) above. 

 

Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ff_report.pdf and 

http://www.forms.gov/bgfPortal/docDetails.do?dId=15149 

 

Line item instructions for completing the SF-425 can be found at: 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ffr_instructions.pdf. 

 

• Performance Reporting 


 

The successful Applicant will provide the following reports to the USAID Agreement Officer’s 

Representative (AOR) and the Agreement Officer, as specified below, in accordance with 2 CFR 

220.327 and 220.328. The Recipient will use the standard form Performance Progress Report 

(SF-PPR) to report performance progress for the program under the award. 

 

A. Quarterly Reports 

 

The recipient should submit quarterly reports at the end of each calendar quarter within thirty (30) 
calendar days following the end of the quarter (i.e. January 30, April 30, July 30, and October 30), 
limited to ten (10) pages, not including annexes. The report should include the following 
components: 

 

● Bulleted list of achievements in the past quarter (1 page) 
● Description of work performed in the past quarter to include identified best practices 
and lessons learned (4-5 pages) 
● Description of collaborative activities with other USAID implementing partners (1-2 
pages) 
● Description of key problems or issues encountered, how they were or will be resolved, 
and, as needed, recommended USAID interventions to facilitate their timely resolution 
(1-2 pages) 
● Bulleted list of planned activities for the next quarter to include dates and locations of 
major events and meetings (1-2 pages) 


 


In addition, the following are required Annexes for the quarterly reports: 

 

● Annex 1: Table of indicators showing progress made during the quarter, cumulative 
results for the fiscal year, and cumulative results for the life of activity set against 
targets. A color scheme for this table should be utilized that highlights, in red, 
indicators not met or in danger of not being met and green for indicators that are being 
met. Provide explanations for targets exceeded and targets unmet. 
● Annex 2: Include a financial table which contains expenses during the reported period, 
year-to-date amount, and remaining budget line item amount. 
● Annex 3: Provide one-two success stories with relevant high resolution photos. Stories 
should highlight the high level impact and/or scalability of the activity's successes. If a 
story could not be done during the reporting period, an explanation should be 
provided. (1 page per story) 


 

B. Annual Report 

 

The recipient should submit an annual report limited to thirty (30) pages, not including annexes. 
The annual report should contain the same components, including annexes, as the quarterly 
reports as described above and be submitted within ninety (90) calendar days following the end of 
the reporting period. For all results that either exceed or fall short of the annual target by ten (10) 
% or more, a narrative explanation must be included in the reporting. The recipient should 
highlight in green all indicators that exceeded targets and highlight in red indicators that fell short 
(red) of their targets. The annual report can also double as the quarterly report for the final quarter 
of the reporting period. 

 

C. Final Report 

 

The recipient should submit a Final Performance Report within ninety (90) calendar days after the 
completion date of activities. The report should not to exceed forty (40) pages, not including 
annexes. The final performance report must be completed in English and be submitted to the 
AOR and the Agreement Officer. It is highly recommended that the final report be prepared 
before the end date of the award since additional costs cannot be incurred after the end date. 

 

The report should minimally include: 

 

● Executive Summary outlining award accomplishments, results, and conclusions as 
well as recommendations for future assistance; 
● Overall description of activities conducted during the life of the Award; 
● Assessment of progress towards Award objectives along with description of results; 
● Description of collaborative activities with other USAID implementing partners; 
● Description of programmatic impact and sustainability; 
● Description of lessons learned and best practices; and 
● Recommendations for future USAID programming. 


 

In addition, a comprehensive property inventory list is required ninety (90) days in advance of 
award completion. 


 

Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) Requirements 

USAID recipients are required to comply with the submission requirements for the 

Development Experience Clearance (http://dec.usaid.gov) pursuant to the Standard 

Provision entitled “Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and 

Publications (June 2012).” 

 

In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR. 

 

D. Geographic Information System (GIS) data 

 

The USAID Niger Country Office is increasing its use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
to support informed decision making and increase the use of evidence to affect decisions and 
resource allocations across the portfolio. Realizing that this is a national-level government 
accountability and policy reform activity, the recipient is required to collect and provide spatial 
data for interventions that occur outside of Niamey, the capital. At a minimum, data must be 
provided in an MS Excel sheet that includes region and commune location names and other 
attribute data agreed upon in coordination with the AOR. 

 

4. Environmental Compliance 


 

As required by the 22 CFR 216, an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) was completed by 
the USAID Niger Country Office to ensure that proposed interventions adhere to U.S. and host 
countries’ environmental requirements, and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted to prevent negative environmental consequences of USAID investment. The 
environmental determination for this IEE was a “categorical exclusion,” given the activity’s focus 
on technical assistance related to government accountability and policy reform. Per ADS 204, the 
IEE will need to be amended and environmental determination reviewed if there is any new 
information or changes in interventions that might require revision of the determination. For 
example, the IEE may need to be amended if the activity starts to focus on policy reform activities 
related to environmental legislation and regulations. 

 
Per ADS 201, all strategies, projects, and activities must be screened for climate risks 
management (CRM). The CRM screening for this activity was undertaken by the USAID Sahel 
Regional Office, in collaboration with USAID’s Africa Bureau and the Niger Country Office, as 
part of the planning for the new Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced II (RISE II) program. Through 
this CRM screening approach, the RISE II program is broadly a climate risk management 
program. RISE II serves to build resilience measures into design in a holistic manner for a fragile 
and climate sensitive region. By addressing upstream (e.g., underlying drivers) and downstream 
(e.g., direct threats) climate risks through multiple interventions, RISE II will work to ensure that 
the systems (e.g., agricultural, finance, health, governance, early warning) being supported are 
more robust, and thus better able to manage climate shocks and stresses. This activity will support 
these efforts by facilitating an improved policy and operating environment for RISE II 
investments. When conducting both supply-side technical assistance to national institutions and 
building the demand for reform and government accountability, the recipient must analyze and 


consider climate and environment impacts of interventions, especially proposed policy reforms. 

 

5. Other Requirements NA. 


 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

The point of contacts for this NOFO and for any questions during the NOFO process is: 

 

See Section D.1 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

1. Other Information: 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

2. List of Annexes 

 

a) Annex #1: Illustrative Budget Template (Attached Excel File) 
b) Annex #2: Standard Provisions 
c) Annex #3: Abbreviations and Acronyms 
d) Annex #4: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Foreign Registration 
e) Annex #5: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Grantee Registration 
f) Annex #6: Past Performance Information 


 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 


ANNEX #1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

An Illustrative Budget Template (Excel File) is attached to this NOFO. 

 

 

 


ANNEX #2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found 
at: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 
and https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in 
the award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Standard Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. 
The award will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

Required Not 
Required Standard Provision 
TBD RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES -PREDETERMINED 
(DECEMBER 2014) 
RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES -PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2014) 
RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE -PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA4. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 
No RAA5. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 
No RAA6. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 
No RAA7. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 
Yes RAA8. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 
Yes RAA9. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 
Yes RAA10. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 
No RAA11. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 
Yes RAA12. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA13. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 
No RAA14. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 
No RAA15. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA16. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA17. USAID DISABILITY POLICY -ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 
No RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 
No RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 
No RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 
No RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 


PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA22. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

Yes 

 

RAA23. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

No 

RAA24. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

No 

RAA25. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

Yes 

 

RAA26. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA27. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

No 

RAA28. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA5. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

Yes 

 

RAA6. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA7. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA8. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA9. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA10. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA11. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA12. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 

 

No 

RAA13. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

Yes 

 

RAA 14. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

No 

RAA15. PROGRAM INCOME (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA16. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

No 

RAA17. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

No 

RAA18. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 




Yes 

 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

No 

RAA22. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

No 

RAA23. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

No 

RAA24. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

No 

RAA25. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

No 

RAA26. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

No 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 



 

 

 


ANNEX #3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan AMELP 

Agreement Officer AO 

Agreement Officer’s Representative AOR 

Automated Directives System ADS 

Civil Society Organization CSO 

Code of Federal Regulations CFR 

Countering Violent Extremism CVE 

Democracy, Human rights and Governance DRG 

Development Objective DO 

Economic and Social Development Plan PDES 

Foreign Direct Investment FDI 

Government of Niger GON 

High Commission for State Modernization HCME 

Human Development Index HDI 

Initial Environmental Examination IEE 

Integrated Country Strategy ICS 

Memorandum of Understandings MOU 

Niger Increased Transparency and Accountability in the Management 

of Natural Resources NITAP 

Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens 3N 

Non-Governmental Organization NGO 

Notice of Funding Opportunity NOFO 

Participatory Responsive Governance – Government 

Accountability and Policy Activity PRG-GAP 

Participatory Responsive Governance—Principal Activity PRG-PA 

Public International Organization PIO 

Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced II RISE II 

Request for Applications RFA 

Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth SDDCI 

United Nations UN 

United Nations Development Program UNDP 

United States Government USG 

Violent Extremist Organizations VEO 

World Health Organization WHO 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #4 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW FOREIGN REGISTRATION 

 

 

 


ANNEX #5 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW GRANTEE REGISTRATION 

 

 

 


ANNEX #6: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION 

 

1. Award Number: 

 

2. Contractor/Recipient (Name and Address): 

 

3. Type of Award: 

4. Complexity of Work: Difficult Routine 

5. Description, location, and relevancy of work: 

 

6. Dollar Value of Work : Status: Active Completed 

 

7. Date of Award: 

Award Completion Date (including extensions): _____ 

 

8. Type and Extent of Subawards: 

 

9. Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address of the Awarding 
Contracting/Agreement Officer and/or the Contracting/Agreement Officer ’s Representative 
(and other references as applicable): 



 

 

[END OF ANNEXES] 

[END OF NOFO] 


