 

Horizontal_RGB_600 


 

 

 

 

NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY 

RESILIENT GOVERNANCE IN NIGER (RGN) 
ACTIVITY 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USAID/SENEGAL 

SAHEL REGIONAL OFFICE (SRO) 

NOFO NO.: 72068520RFA00003 

 

NOVEMBER 2019 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Lockup_SENEGAL_RGB_HIGH 


 

 

 

Issue Date: November 20, 2019 

Deadline for Questions: December 06, 2019 

Closing Date: January 10, 2020 

Closing Time: 17:30 Local Dakar, Senegal Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72068520RFA00003 

 

Program Title: Resilient Governance in Niger (RGN) Activity 

 

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number: 98.001 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the RGN program. Eligibility for this 
award is not restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements 
and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov 
www.grants.gov 
support@grants.gov 
, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.h. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description Page 5 

 

 

Section B – Federal Award Information Page 26 

 

 

Section C – Eligibility Information Page 29 

 

 

Section D – Application and Submission Information Page 30 

 

 

Section E – Application Review Information Page 47 

 

 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information Page 50 

 

 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts Page 59 

 

 

Section H – Other Information Page 60 

ANNEXES 

Annex #1 - Summary Budget Template Page 61 

Annex #2 - Standard Provisions Page 62 

Annex #3 - Abbreviations and Acronyms Page 65 

Annex #4 - SAM quick start guide for new foreign registration Page 66 

Annex #5 - SAM quick start guide for new grantee registration Page 67 

Annex #6: Past Performance Information Page 68 

Annex #7: Rise II Results Framework Page 69 

Annex #8: Key Nigerien Interlocutors Page 70 

Annex #9: Key USAID/Niger Bilateral Governance Activities Page 72 

Annex #10: Other RISE II activities Page 74 

Annex #11: Bridge Objectives and Results Framework Page 76 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by 
USAID to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development 
Objectives. Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” and 
“Project” as used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and implementation of 
USAID development assistance. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Introduction and Overview 

 

USAID has been building resilience in the Sahel region since 2013. Resilience is defined as “the 
ability of people, households, communities, countries, and systems to mitigate, adapt to, and 
recover from shocks and stresses in a manner that reduces chronic vulnerability and facilitates 
inclusive growth.”1 In short, resilience is the ability to manage adversity and change without 
compromising future well-being. As this suggests, resilience is a necessary condition—or set of 
capacities—for reducing and ultimately eliminating poverty, hunger, malnutrition, and 
humanitarian assistance needs in the complex risk environments in which USAID works, and in 
which poor and chronically vulnerable people live. 

1 https://www.usaid.gov/resilience 

2 See Annex 1 for the RISE II Results Framework and here for the RISE II Technical Approach Working Paper 

3 USAID, Midterm Performance Assessment of USAID’s “Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced” (RISE) Initiative in 
Burkina Faso and Niger, (Dakar, 2017) 

4 A separate governance activity for Burkina Faso is under design. 

 

The first Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) project was developed in 2012 to implement 
USAID’s resilience programming in Niger and Burkina Faso. RISE II 2 continues the same 
efforts, but with a refined approach and goal: Chronically vulnerable populations in Burkina 
Faso and Niger, supported by resilient systems, effectively manage shocks and stresses and 
pursue sustainable pathways out of poverty (See below for an overview of RISE II starting on p.9, 
Annex 1 for the RISE II framework, and Annex 4 for descriptions of other RISE II activities). 

 

A mid-term evaluation of RISE noted the absence of a cohesive approach to local governance 
deficits that impede service delivery and citizen accountability, stymie community resilience, and 
increase vulnerability to violent extremism.3 To address this gap, RISE II includes a crosscutting 
governance activity, Resilient Governance in Niger (RGN, or the Activity)4. 

 

RGN will focus on RISE II Objective 4: Enhance governance of institutions and organizations, 
specifically sub IR 4.1: Improved performance of sub-national state institutions and sub IR 4.2: 
Strengthened local civil society and community based organizations. RGN will operate in a 
complex, unpredictable environment supporting locally-driven, politically feasible approaches to 
achieve three key objectives: 

 

Objective 1: Communal authorities, traditional leaders, and regional representatives of the GON 
understand their respective roles and responsibilities in local governance, and engage in more 
effective intergovernmental communications and collaboration to address community needs, 
especially those of women, youth, and other marginalized populations. 

 


Objective 2: Communal governments more accountably plan, manage and execute budgets, 
ensure provision of basic services, and mobilize financial and human resources in support of 
locally-determined development priorities. 

 

Objective 3: Citizens and local civil actors5 know their rights, have greater agency to engage in 
communal governance processes, and actively exercise these rights through institutionalized and 
ad-hoc mechanisms. 

5 This term is broadly defined to include official community development committees, registered NGOs, religious 
leaders, traditional authorities, community-based groups and associations (e.g. water users associations, women’s 
saving clubs, radio listening clubs, as well as national-level CSOs etc.) 

6 Bande, Chadakori, Damakaram Takaya, Dantchio, Dogo Dogo, Dungass, Gouchi, Gouri, Guidan Rounji, Guidan 
Sori, Guidiguiri, Guidimundi, Kwaya, Magaria, Malawa, Mazamni, Sassoumbroum, Wacha, and Yekoua 

7See youth and gender analyses commissioned for RISE II. 

 

To amplify RISE II’s impact, RGN will focus on municipalities that are also receiving support 
under RISE II’s two Development Food Security Assistance (DFSA) awards in Maradi and 
Zinder regions, which account for two-thirds of Nigeriens living in poverty.6 RGN’s selected 
implementing partner (IP) will need to align and coordinate closely with DFSA partners to 
minimize duplication and maximize synergies. Since DFSAs in Niger may take differing 
approaches, RGN’s role and interventions will need to be adjusted for each particular 
circumstance, and also take into account other development activities that are not USAID-funded. 

 

RGN will contribute to RISE II’s cross-cutting goal of increasing the social and economic agency 
of women and youth, building their capacity and the responsiveness of others to their views in 
local governance, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, and policy advocacy at 
higher levels7. 

 

USAID will know that RGN has been successful when it can observe an improvement in the 
delivery of services that respond to expressed citizen priorities, enhanced management of local 
conflicts, strengthened risk reduction and shock response, and an improved local business 
environment. Achieving these higher level impacts will not be accomplished by RGN on its own. 
The RGN implementer is required to collaborate closely with other RISE II activities that are 
investing in integrated community development or in specific sectors such as health, water 
security, and agriculture. RGN will also need to coordinate with programming under the 
BRIDGE project (see p.12 below for more info and Annex 1 for the BRIDGE results framework), 
which could be working with similar partners, particularly in civil society and higher levels of 
government. 

 

RGN will be managed by the DRG team in the USAID/Senegal Sahel Regional Office 
(USAID/SRO); it is anticipated to be for five years. The total budget for this activity is $19.8 
million of which $2 million is set aside for a crisis modifier that allows the Implementer to 


undertake additional early actions or shock response in the event of a projected or current shock 
and/or crisis. More information is contained in the Staffing and Management section. 

 

Niger’s Governance and Development Context 

Over the past two decades, despite increasing amounts of official development assistance and 
relative success in attracting foreign direct investment, particularly in the mining sector and the 
telecommunications industry, Niger has stalled at the bottom of the United Nations Development 
Program’s Human Development Index (HDI). While the Government of Niger’s (GON) response 
to exogenous factors such as violent extremism (VE) and terrorism has burdened the country’s 
budget and disrupted the national economy in many regions, decreasing government performance 
is also attributable to lack of capacity, poor service delivery, weak policy framework, lack of 
citizen voice and government accountability, and corruption. 

 

This lack of government responsiveness to both the needs of citizens and development 
stakeholders has translated into citizen dissatisfaction with public service provision and hindered 
sustainable development outcomes. In fact, public service provision has decreased in critical 
development sectors. As an example, the education sector is routinely disrupted by teacher and 
student strikes throughout the school year, resulting in significant negative impact on education 
quality. The main complaints of teachers and students alike revolve around unpaid salaries and 
scholarships, lack of educational infrastructure, and nepotism and corruption in career 
management and teacher deployment. With 1.4 years of schooling on average, the level of 
education of Nigeriens is among the lowest in the world. Sixteen percent of the adult population 
has completed primary education and only 2.1 percent has completed secondary. Literacy rates 
are concomitantly low—14 percent of women and 42 percent of men are literate (2012 data)—as 
is the availability of skills in the economy. Limited access to information further compounds the 
lack of education of the population. Internet access is a rarity and the majority of the population 
does not even have access to mass media; only 40 percent of the population listens to the radio at 
least once a week8. 

8 Source: Niger Systematic Country Diagnostic, World Bank 2017: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/998751512408491271/pdf/NIGER-SCD-12012017.pdf 

 

Low civic engagement has also contributed to perpetuating poor government performance and 
impunity. A growing number of citizens have lost faith in the effectiveness of the modern socalled 
democratic government. As a result, some youth are falling prey to violent extremist 
organizations’ (VEOs) rhetoric about state inequality, nepotism, and ineffectiveness. In spite of 
this dismal picture, many civil society organization (CSO) leaders, journalists, private sector 
entities, reform champions, and decision makers are working with donor support, and continue to 
believe that change is possible. 

 

Core DRG problem: Political Accountability and Competition 

In 2017, USAID conducted a nationwide democracy, human rights and governance (DRG) 
assessment in Niger. The assessment found that deficits exist in each of the five DRG 


dimensions,9 but that the core of Niger’s poor development performance is centered on weak 
political competition and government accountability. In short, the combination of low citizen 
engagement to hold the government accountable and actively participate in economic and 
political processes, a lack of information and access to government procurement opportunities, 
and ineffective accountability within government institutions results in a vicious cycle whereby 
the GON has little incentive to improve services or enact more responsive policies to citizen 
needs. At the same time, citizens do not believe that action will bring about change. 

Critical national government institutions responsible for government oversight, ensuring 
government transparency and accountability, and providing checks and balances in governance 
structures depend financially on and are politically aligned with the executive branch. 
Niger’s budget process is not open to citizen input and suffers from limited effectiveness of 
Parliamentary oversight of the executive.10 The Supreme Audit Institution files annual audit 
reports addressed to the head of the executive branch as a simple formality. 

Niger has opaque policy formation, government decision-making, and implementation processes, 
with limited avenues for citizen input. Legislative and policy formulation and adoption are often 
not participatory or transparent, and consequently lack popular support—which in turn hinders 
effective implementation. For example, Niger’s Parliament is a public accountability institution 
with a strong formal mandate but it struggles to execute this authority. Parliament has expressed 
interest in conducting executive oversight (e.g., questioning ministers on government 
performance) and formulating better public policy (e.g., the Defense Committee meeting with 
conflict-affected communities to understand the impact of security measures). 

In this context of low horizontal accountability, poor public sector performance is a perpetual 
source of frustration for citizens and puts vulnerable populations at an even greater risk of food 
insecurity. In the absence of a mechanism for recourse, weak governance, poor service delivery, 
and impunity could push desperate citizens to join or support VEOs. In remote and under-
governed parts of the country, violent, or merely illegal, alternatives to defend or promote 
interests are an option for Nigeriens. 

Decentralization 

Decentralization was first codified in Niger’s 1992 constitution.11 The 2002 local government 
law created 265 communes, 230 classified as rural, defined as having fewer than 10,000 
inhabitants. Communes are the third level of administrative unit, after the 8 regions (headed by 
governors) and 63 departments (headed by prefects). Communes have an administrative center 
and also comprise surrounding villages, where schools and health facilities are often located. 

9 The five dimensions defined by USAID’s Strategic Assessment Framework (SAF) are Consensus, Inclusion, 
Political Accountability and Competition, Rule of Law and Human Rights, and Government Responsiveness and 
Effectiveness 

10 Niger scored 0/100 on the 2017 Open Budget Index ranking: https://www.internationalbudget.org/open-budgetsurvey/
results-by-country/country-info/?country=ne 

11 The 1992 constitution was followed by new constitutions in 1996, 1999, 2009, and 2010 (source: Wikipedia) 


The local government law, a National Policy on Decentralization, and the 2011 local governments 
code provide the framework for devolving fiscal and administrative authorities and outline the 
role of traditional authorities. The first local elections were held in 2004. Following the 2010 
coup d’etat, regional and municipal elected executives and councils were replaced by nationally 
appointed ‘consultative commissions’ until the 2011 local elections. The 2016 regional and 
municipal elections have been postponed indefinitely. The mandate of locally elected officials 
continues to be extended every six months. 

 

On paper, local governments have broad responsibilities for economic development, education, 
social services, and cultural development; at the municipal level, they also are charged with 
primary health care, and water (both potable and for agricultural purposes).12 With the 
decentralization of oversight and management responsibilities for these key services to the 
commune level, and recent policies and guidance to support private and public sector models of 
service operation, it is essential to ensure that municipal governments have the capacity to 
effectively implement their oversight, financial, and coordination role between the villages and 
departments and national regulatory agencies. 

12 OECD, 2016 

13 Local governments hosting extractives activities are statutorily entitled to an aggregate 15% of all mining and 
petroleum royalties (and other smaller revenues). The Treasurer is required to issue a circular defining splits in 
transfers between local governments on an annual basis; however, but the MoF has not issued one since 2013, 
effectively halting sub-national transfers. In 2017, Niger was suspended from EITI for inadequate progress in 
meeting certain EITI standards, including civil society engagement. The GON disputed these findings, and withdrew 
from EITI in late October 2017 (Source: EITI/Niger) 

14 https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/NE-Mar17-PFMPR-Public%20with%20PEFA%20Check.pdf 

 

Communal governments are severely constrained by limited and low-capacity human resources 
(many local councillors, particularly in rural areas, are illiterate) and inadequate financial 
resources. Local government officials and citizens alike have limited understanding of the 
functions communal governments are supposed to fulfill and what the role is of deconcentrated 
GON authorities. Communes are supposed to receive 5% of national government revenues to 
fund their operations,13 and can levy certain local taxes and fees. Fiscal transfers from the 
national government are, however, unreliable and opaque, a reflection of tepid commitment to 
decentralization and weak public financial management.14 Municipal budgets are insufficient to 
cover operating expenses. NGOs and donors help meet the services gap to a limited extent, but 
this arguably takes pressure off of the GON to improve its performance, enhance revenue 
generation, and spend more for essential services. The state-citizen vacuum at the local level 
leaves communities—in particular youth—vulnerable to recruitment by VE groups. This creates 
a vicious cycle as the security sector claims a greater share of the GON budget to address VE 
threats, leaving even less to improve governance systems and service delivery. 

 

In 2017, the Nigerien government took concrete steps to devolve four important sectors’ 
competencies (education, health, hydraulic/water, and environment) to communes. This transfer 


of competencies to communes, however, happened in a context where mayors were dismissed and 
entire municipal councils were dissolved and replaced by handpicked executive appointees. 
Nonetheless, a few entrepreneurial mayors and local councils have used this devolution of 
competencies to find local solutions to their service needs. Some line ministries are also taking 
action. Recently the Ministry of Basic Education started implementing competencies through 
devolution actions. The management of teachers of basic education was transferred to the 
responsibility of the Mayor, and the Ministry of Primary Education will grant each commune 
budget according to the needs of the municipality. 

 

Preliminary Theory of Change 

RGN’s preliminary theory of change posits that: 

 

If local and regional governments understand their roles and responsibilities and have greater 
capacity to collaboratively and accountably plan, manage, and mobilize resources; and 

 

If local and regional governments are motivated to cooperate in fulfilling their mutual 
responsibilities for the provision of basic services; and 

 

If citizens, civil society and the private sector understand their rights, enhance their agency to 
voice their diverse perspectives, and have meaningful opportunities to engage in communal 
governance processes; 

 

Then Nigerien government institutions will be more effective and accountable in fulfilling their 
responsibilities and the state-citizen social contract will be strengthened, contributing to 
individual, household, and community resilience. 

 

Applicants are also invited to suggest adjustments to this preliminary theory of change, which will 
be reviewed regularly to (re)validate and/or adjust underlying assumptions and programming 
approaches. 

 

Critical assumptions: 

● Targeted national, regional, and local authorities commit to collaborate with RGN 
● Security conditions remain (relatively) stable 
● 2021 elections are peaceful and do not affect government commitment to RGN 


 

Objectives and Anticipated Results 

While RGN’s focus will be at the commune level, its ability to achieve results demands 
navigating the political economy of power dynamics between municipal governments, traditional 
authorities, deconcentrated line ministries, other national level government bodies.15 RGN’s 

15 These include the Direction Générale de la Décentralisation et des Collectivités Territoriales (DGDCT), L’Agence 
Nationale de Financement des Collectivités Territoriales (ANFICT), the Head of department (Prefets), the National 
inspection of local governments in charge of auditing communes, and Haute Commissariat de l’Initiative 3N (HC3N 
- Les Nigériens Nourrissent les Nigériens). 


programmatic objectives and anticipated results have been intentionally drafted in a broad frame 
(readers will note the absence of a list of illustrative activities or indicators). 
Objective 1: Communal authorities, traditional leaders, and regional representatives of the GON 
understand their respective local governance roles and responsibilities, and engage in more 
effective intergovernmental communications and collaboration to address community needs, 
especially those of women, youth, and other marginalized populations. 

 

Anticipated Results 

● Municipal governments, traditional leaders, and regional representatives of the GON 
understand their division of responsibilities and respective authorities for communal 
governance 
● Municipal governments coordinate with traditional leaders, other tiers of government, 
donors, CSOs, and private sector service providers and take ownership of the provision of 
essential services 
● Municipal government staff and elected/appointed officials demonstrate knowledge of 
local government policies and regulations, and of their administrative and management 
duties 
● Regularized channels for intra- and inter-governmental dialogue on budget planning, 
execution and oversight are institutionalized and the voices of women, youth, and other 
marginalized populations are elevated 
● Mandated fiscal flows from national to municipal government are more transparent, 
rational, and regular 


 

Objective 2: Municipal governments more accountably plan, manage and execute budgets, 
ensure provision of basic services, and mobilize financial and human resources in support of 
locally-determined development priorities. 

 

Anticipated Results 

● Municipal budget management and administrative policies, procedures, and regulations 
are transparent, institutionalized, and implemented by commune officials and staff 
● Municipal governments have greater capacity and cooperate more effectively with to 
provide essential services and respond to locally-determined community needs, 
● Municipal governments pro-actively engage local civic groups, traditional leaders, and 
community structures (with a strong focus on the inclusion of women, youth and other 
marginalized populations), in planning and budget processes, and provide regular 
information on the use of public resources 
● Municipal governments mobilize increased own-source revenues for priority infrastructure 
and service needs 
● Procurement processes are more transparent and follow competitive bidding rules and 
regulations 
● Municipal governments partner with government agencies, the private sector, civil society, 
traditional leaders, and other actors to find local solutions to address priority community 
needs 
● Municipal governments demonstrate greater agency in advocating for communal priorities 
in national level policy and budget processes 



● Sub-national government officials (communal and regional) have access to professional 
development, peer-learning, and training opportunities, including literacy and numeracy16 


16USAID’s PDEV-II activity worked with GON public administration entities to develop and deliver training 
curricula for subnational governments. Other donors have made similar investments. 

17 This term is broadly defined to include official community development committees, registered NGOs, religious 
leaders, traditional authorities, community-based groups and associations (e.g. water users associations, women’s 
saving clubs, radio listening clubs, as well as national-level CSOs ) 

 

Objective 3: Citizens and local civil actors17 know their rights, have greater agency to engage in 
communal governance processes, and actively exercise these rights through institutionalized and 
ad-hoc mechanisms 

 

Anticipated Results 

● Municipal governments have formal, activated structures for citizen participation 
● Citizens have increased knowledge of the services municipal governments are responsible 
for, and of mechanisms for community participation 
● Citizens more actively engage in community planning, budgeting and local government 
oversight processes 
● Municipal services and infrastructure investments better reflect citizen priorities, in 
particular those of youth, women, and other marginalized populations 
● Women, youth and other marginalized populations have greater voice and agency in 
communal governance processes 
● Community and civil society organizations, exercise increased capacity to advocate on 
behalf of their constituencies and hold government accountable for delivering public 
services. 


 

USAID’s approach to building resilience in the Sahel 

The Sahel today is marked by food and water insecurity, persistent poverty, poor governance, 
high population growth rates, and recurrent climate shocks and stresses that contribute to crisis 
and can enhance vulnerability to conflict and violent extremism. USAID and the wider 
development community recognize that the pattern of repeated humanitarian crises over decades 
is partly because the frequency and magnitude of shocks has exceeded local coping capacity 
leaving people and systems less able to manage the risks they face and recover when a shock 
occurs. In addition, they are highly vulnerable because of poor health and nutrition status, 
extreme poverty, illiteracy, extended annual lean seasons, indebtedness, gender inequality, 
degraded natural resources, poor access to clean water, sanitation and health services, and low 
agricultural productivity—all exacerbated by persistent governance failures. However, it is 
important to note that populations in the Sahel are still remarkably resilient given the very 
difficult conditions in the region. It is important to better understand and build on indigenous 
strategies for managing shocks and stresses, and analyze where and how they may no longer be 
able to meet current and future challenges. 

 


Shocks and stresses in the Sahel will become even more severe in the future. Climate change is 
already negatively impacting the region and future climate projections indicate that rainfall will 
become more intense, unpredictable, and less frequent, while average temperatures will increase. 
This will affect the reliability of water quantity and quality available and increase the frequency 
and intensity of major droughts and floods in the Sahel.18 Added to this are increased conflict and 
instability, environmental degradation, rapid population growth, and a young age structure where 
approximately half of the populations in Burkina Faso and Niger are below the age of 15.19 
Together, these climate and non-climate trends are exacerbating existing vulnerabilities in the 
region, especially those related to water and land insecurity. 

18 Fifth Assessment Report, IPCC, 2014 

19 https://www.usaid.gov/documents/1860/usaid-sahel-youth-analysis 

20 https://www.usaid.gov/resilience 

 

In response to these dynamics, USAID is working in the Sahel region to build resilience, defined 
as “the ability of people, households, communities, countries, and systems to mitigate, adapt to, 
and recover from shocks and stresses in a manner that reduces chronic vulnerability and facilitates 
inclusive growth.”20 In short, resilience is the ability to manage adversity and change without 
compromising future well-being. As this suggests, resilience is a necessary condition—or set of 
capacities—for reducing and ultimately eliminating poverty, hunger, malnutrition, and 
humanitarian assistance needs in the complex risk environments in which USAID works, and in 
which poor and chronically vulnerable people live. 

 

The Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) project was developed in 2012 to implement 
USAID’s resilience programming in Niger and Burkina Faso. The next generation, RISE II, 
continues the same efforts, but with a refined approach. The RISE II goal is that: Chronically 
vulnerable populations in Burkina Faso and Niger, supported by resilient systems, effectively 
manage shocks and stresses and pursue sustainable pathways out of poverty. 

 

This goal statement reflects USAID’s key priorities—that vulnerable populations and individuals 
need to be the actors in their own development, that supportive systems (including natural 
resources management, early warning and response, and governance) are essential to their 
success, that shocks and stressors are central contextual factors that must be explicitly addressed, 
and that success will be measured by the extent to which these communities are able to 
sustainably progress to a higher level of well-being. 

 

The RISE II goal is transformational, seeking to enhance individual, household, community, and 
institutional capacities to sustain and improve well-being in a dynamic environment of challenges 
and opportunities. RISE II seeks to contribute to absorptive, adaptive, and transformative 
resilience capacities and will measure the extent to which those capacities are enhanced. 
However, to achieve sustained results, RISE II will provide extra attention to those aspects of the 


resilience capacities that have been shown by research and experience to be particularly effective. 
All USAID RISE II activities should contribute to these transformative outcomes: 

 

● Enhanced community leadership of local development 
● Enhanced social capital, through strengthened ties of mutual assistance among people 
● Enhanced capacity to collaborate, learn, and adapt among beneficiaries, local partners, and 
partner governments 


 

RISE II has five objectives that together will contribute to achieving the goal and the 
transformative outcomes. While particular USAID implementing partners may have areas of 
technical focus under these objectives (RGN will focus on IRs 4.1 and 4.2 of Objective 4), all 
partners must contribute to Objectives 1, 4, and 5 because these include cross-cutting elements. 
The five objectives below are elaborated more fully in the RISE II results framework (Annex 1). 

 

Objective 1: Enhance social and ecological risk management systems. Well-functioning 
ecological systems are essential to the RISE II goal because they provide and regulate the water 
essential for human health and keep landscapes productive for agricultural and pastoral 
livelihoods. Human systems of risk management complement healthy ecosystems, by providing 
information to manage risk, social safety nets to respond in times of shock, and governance to 
ensure benefits are equitably distributed. 

 

Objective 2: Increase and sustain economic well-being. Improved livelihoods, including 
profitable diversification, are essential for households to escape poverty. Individuals and 
households achieve this when they have individual capacity, access to resources, and 
opportunities to engage in inclusive, growing markets. 

 

Objective 3: Improve health, family planning, and nutrition outcomes. Health and 
nutritional security are central to human well-being and reduce the risk of disease or death that 
can plunge a household back into poverty. Reducing high levels of population growth is essential 
to the sustainability of the natural resource base and the ability of the government to provide the 
services the population needs to escape poverty. 

 

Objective 4: Enhance governance of institutions and organizations. Effective governance at 
local and national level supports the sustained achievement of the other objectives by helping 
state and civil society institutions become more transparent, accountable, and effective at 
delivering services. Improved governance empowers communities to lead their own 
development, resulting in local solutions to felt needs. 

 

Objective 5: Enhance social, economic, and political agency of women and youth. USAID 
puts a particular emphasis on enhancing the agency of women and youth because they are often in 
a worse position compared to adult men, and yet can have an outsized impact on the well-being of 
others. Building their capacities, promoting their leadership and inclusion, and increasing their 
access to and control over productive resources will lead to reduced risk, enhanced livelihoods, 
improved health outcomes, and more representative governance. 

 


USAID intends to implement RISE II in a targeted geography (zone of influence) in which 
multiple partners implement complementary programs in the same areas and program 
collaboratively. In Niger, the zone of influence encompasses the Maradi region, and the entire 
Zinder region except the northernmost desert communes. 

 

RISE II activities are designed to be flexible and allow adjustments to implementation modalities 
and/or geography in response to changing situations on the ground, U.S. Government priorities, 
resource availability, and other challenges or opportunities. 

 

Overview of the Bridge Project 

To provide further context for the programming environment in which the RGN will work, it is 
instructive to understand USAID’s Bridge Project. Bridge explicitly and intentionally aims 
programming interventions at the nexus of violent extremism and resilience, recognizing that 
many development challenges serve as ‘push’ factors, potentially driving the most vulnerable 
towards extremist groups that offer fulfillment of critical unmet needs (e.g. income, justice, 
services, protection/security, etc.). Relative geographic areas of insecurity in the Sahel are 
broadly defined by USAID as “hot,” “warm,” and “cool” or “buffer.” Hot areas are insecure 
places that are already plagued by violent extremism, where USAID programs the majority of 
traditional CVE programming such as the NEW-CVE project.21 Warm areas are those that are 
adjacent to the hot areas, where the security enabling environment allows for flexible and 
dynamic longer-term development programming that addresses core, localized drivers of violent 
extremism—this is where a large share of Bridge activities will focus. Cool or buffer areas are 
where resilience programming addresses chronic vulnerability and underlying poverty with longer 
term time horizons—this is where RISE II will program.22 

21 The project purpose of NEW-CVE is to weaken the legitimacy and ideology of VEOs through lines of effort 
reflecting three sub-purposes: West African capacity to counter violent extremism strengthened, Moderate voices 
amplified, and Community cohesion increased. 

22 The “area” concept helps to enhance clarity of communication and suggests sequencing and transition trajectories, 
but it is also critical to recognize that these geographic areas actually represent a patchwork of different geographies 
that lie on a continuum of insecurity. Threats are not omnipresent, pockets of stability exist - typically, but not 
always, in more settled places - and threat levels can sometimes change quite rapidly. Consequently, some program 
elements may be productively employed, even in areas which may not seem “ready,”and some elements may not be 
used when an area may otherwise appear to be in a more stable location. 

 

Sahel Development Partnership 

USAID’s Sahel Development Partnership for Burkina Faso and Niger (SDP) is an integrated 
framework that guides multiple interventions to help stabilize focus areas by countering violent 
extremism and building local communities’ resilience. Through SDP, USAID seeks to halt the 
spread of violent extremist groups, avert costly humanitarian crises, and stem the flow of 
destabilizing migration. The extremist threat in the region creates another layer of shocks and 
stresses that compound existing resilience and development challenges, and introduces a host of 
security concerns for the United States and its partners. SDP guides development activities that 
are part of a broader national security partnership with Burkina Faso and Niger governments and 


affected communities. USAID will implement SDP in coordination with the Departments of 
State, Defense, and other U.S. Government agencies. 

 

SDP has three, flexible implementation arms to enable programming to respond to varying levels 
of influence of violent extremist organizations (VEOs): 

 

● Intensive CVE programming and emergency humanitarian interventions in areas with 
active conflict or violent attacks (“hot” areas) in Tillaberi, Niger, and the Sahel and East 
regions of northern Burkina Faso to address immediate VEO threats 
● Transitional livelihood, governance, and CVE programming focused on “warm” areas 
and/or former “hot” areas 
● Multi-sector resilience and development programming (e.g. RISE II) in more stable 
“buffer” areas prone to recurrent humanitarian crises, with the flexibility to expand into 
former warm and hot zones as conditions further improve and resources allow. 


 

SDP areas of intervention will likely change based on the dynamic security situation. 

 

Operational Principles 

Drawn from the RISE II and Bridge the core operational principles below reflect important tenets 
of USAID’s commitment to assisting partner countries on their journey to self-reliance, and will 
guide all programming under RISE II and Bridge, including RGN. 

 

● Community-led development: Through dialogue, support communities to develop and 
implement priority actions that address core challenges and opportunities 
● Inclusive targeting: Support the poorest households by responding to their specific 
needs, enhancing their aspirations, and strengthening their ability to access resources and 
services to pursue pathways out of poverty 
● Leverage a systems approach23: Since the Sahel is a complex, multi-dimensional, and 
fluid operating environment, it will be critical to analyze and plan all interventions strive 
to understand the various components of the systems in which they will work, as well as 
how they interact, affect each other, and produce effects. Programming should always 
seek to approach the element in the system that can create positive catalytic effects that 
sustain and expand naturally after the life of the activity. 
● Strengthen and work through local systems24: Development practitioners are often 
outsiders that cannot fully appreciate the context and systems within which development 


23 See for example: http://www.aplu.org/projects-and-initiatives/international-programs/knowledge-center-foradvancing-
development-through-higher-education/knowledge-center-library/systems-thinking-workshop-roundtablepresentations/
file 

24USAID’s Local Systems Framework (https://www.usaid.gov/policy/local-systems-framework) defines clear and 
practical steps USAID and its partners can take toward realizing a vision of development that is locally owned, 
locally led and locally sustained. 

 


problems exist. Lacking the depth of knowledge about barriers to and opportunities for 
success that are second nature to local actors. Therefore, programming will apply a 
participatory and facilitative approach to activity design during planning and throughout 
the life of the activity to ensure the relevance and sustainability of the activities. 
Activities will also remain open to modifying their approach based on lessons learned 
through implementation. Locally-led programming is more context relevant, tailored, and 
sustainable and empowers local stakeholders on their journey to self-reliance. Activities 
should map, reinforce, and improve existing platforms and institutions rather than creating 
parallel structures. 


 

● Maintain a flexible, iterative approach that embraces collaboration, learning and 
adapting (CLA): RGN must remain flexible and be ready to adapt to changes on the 
ground due to the volatile and dynamic nature of the operating environment, particularly 
in areas that show signs of potentially shifting rapidly. This will require the robust 
integration of USAID’s (CLA) principles throughout planning and implementation and 
activity-level contingency planning to prepare for rapid deterioration of the operating 
environment. The activity will also adapt programming based on dynamic learning, 
enabling the activity to focus on programming that is having real impact and halt 
programming that is not. This is particularly important in efforts to strengthen local 
institutions and systems, as in principle two, above. 


 

● Promote institutional entrepreneurship: In order for ineffective institutions to evolve, 
change, and develop, they must bring in fresh perspectives. The idea here is to stimulate 
change from within by incorporating outliers at the periphery with new ideas that can 
enhance institutional functionality. This can happen by bringing in non-embedded actors 
(i.e. youth, women, and other non-traditional partners) into institutions and allowing them 
to participate in institutional processes.25 


25 The Overseas Development Institute and others have outlined a methodology titled “problem driven iterative 
adaptation” as one way to achieve these results. This is also an area of overlap with RISE II’s governance approach. 
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/8409.pdf 

 

● Leverage public-private partnerships where possible: Many private sector firms want 
to pursue agendas of social responsibility and could be ideal development partners. The 
private sector brings special resources, skills and capacities to the table that can augment 
the impact of USAID interventions when strategically aligned. 


 

● Harness innovation: Innovation can come in different forms. Many think of 
technological innovations, but innovations can also come in the form of new creative 
approaches or new intervention ideas for piloting and testing. Programming should 
innovate, test, and learn from new models where possible. It should also encourage and 
seek out positive deviance and innovation from the communities themselves as their 
ability to problem-solve will be key for their journey to self-reliance. 


 


RGN Programmatic Approach 

A growing body of research26 finds that “...the persistence of poor policy and dysfunctional 
institutions usually has less to do with a lack of knowledge or finance than with the actions of 
powerful actors, groups or collective movements who gain from existing arrangements and resist 
change (Leftwich 2011). As such, the difference between programmes that support successful 
developmental change and those that fall short is said to be a deep understanding of and proactive 
engagement with local political and power relations…”27 USAID’s own experience in Niger and 
the Sahel region reinforces the need to ground efforts to tackle Niger’s deeply entrenched 
governance (and, by extension, resilience and security) challenges in a deep—and regularly 
updated—understanding of local political economy dynamics. While standard human and 
institutional capacity building approaches (technical assistance, training) will play a role under 
RGN, progress towards achieving RGN’s objectives will depend more on the Activity’s ability to 
understand the incentives and disincentives of various actors, facilitate alignment of interests, and 
support collective action by Nigerien power brokers and stakeholders28 to improve local 
governance systems, increase government accountability, and strengthen citizen voice and 
agency. 

26 See, for example, Laws and Marquette, 2018, Brinkerhoff, Frazer and McGregor, 2017, and Booth and Unsworth, 
2014, 

27 Thinking and Working Politically: Reviewing the Evidence TWP Community of Practice, 2018: 
https://twpcommunity.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Thinking-and-working-politically-reviewing-theevidence.
pdf 

28 This may include a constellation of political and economic elites, government bureaucrats, traditional authorities, 
civil society, community-based organizations, academia, the private sector, religious organizations, youth and 
women’s groups... 

29 A growing body of thought (see here and here for example) points to the importance of hiring ‘development 
entrepreneurs’ and placing more value on facilitation, negotiation, networking skills, local knowledge/relationships, 
and openness to new ideas, and less on technical qualifications. 

 

Thinking and working politically necessitates a different relationship and level of trust and 
collaboration between USAID and the selected implementing partner (IP). USAID/SRO views 
the role of the RGN IP as a local systems enabler rather than a producer of logframe-driven 
activities with prescribed inputs and outputs. RGN’s ‘authorizing environment’ will support 
strategy testing, with regular feedback loops (e.g., pause and reflect sessions) to inform 
programming adjustments and decisions to scale up or terminate interventions. The non-linear, 
complex pathways to change RGN will of necessity mean thinking differently about program 
staffing, how to measure progress and outcomes (further discussed in the 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning section), and embracing ‘failure’ as a necessary part of the 
learning and change process. 
29 resource allocations, 

 

RGN will operate in a complex environment with many other development partners, government 
institutions, and local organizations. Programming should be informed by USAID and other 
donors’ previous and ongoing governance interventions in Niger, including Peace through 


Development II (PDEV II - 2011-2016), Participatory Responsive Governance–Principal Activity 
(PRG-PA - 2016-2021), and the new Participatory Responsive Governance–Governance 
Accountability Program (PRG-GAP) (see Annex 3 for summaries), identifying and building on 
what is already working, and supporting ‘best fit’30 rather than ‘best practice’ approaches. The 
Activity should actively seek windows of opportunities to nurture “non-traditional” coalitions of 
partners with shared interests and incentives in addressing specific governance problems and 
opportunities (e.g. cleaning up a market area, repaving a section of road, etc.). Such loosely-
defined partnerships will take different forms and be of varying durations, depending on the issue 
and space for change. 

Refine and Implement Period 

The first six months following award are intended as a ‘refine and implement’ period. 
Applicants’ applications should present an initial work plan for this six month period outlining 
their approach to: 

1)Deepen understanding of on-the-ground conditions and local political economy dynamics. 
Illustrative questions might include: 
● 
What are key blockages to improving local governance and service delivery, given Niger’s 
political settlement? 
● 
Where within the GON can reform champions and ‘islands of effectiveness’ be found? 
How much influence do they wield? 
● 
How do inter-ministerial and inter-governmental power relations and incentives determine 
which elements of decentralization (e.g., administrative, fiscal) have—or may be able to 
gain—support from key political and economic elites? 
● 
What roles do traditional leaders in targeted RGN communes play? What incentives do 
they have to support or block RGN’s objectives? 
● 
What factors account for ‘positive deviant’ communes—those with some success in 
tackling local service and infrastructure needs (e.g., water supply, sanitation, road 
maintenance)? 
● 
What seem to be the most promising entry points/issues at the national, regional, and 
communal levels around which coalitions for change can be fostered? 
2)Map the landscape of related GON, USAID, and other donor activities 
3)Consult/develop relationships with Nigerien counterparts and other USG implementers 
4)Identify and plan (initial) collaboration opportunities; ground-truth programming approaches 
and refine RGN’s theory of change 
30 “‘Best fit’...describes aid programmes that are optimally adapted to the political, social and economic context. 
Such programmes can take advantage of a plurality of possible solutions, which can be deployed flexibly. They often 
work at multiple levels simultaneously..to facilitate and bring about change.” Ramalingam, Laric and Primrose, From 
best practice to best fit: Understanding and navigating wicked problems in international development, ODI working 
paper July 2014 


5) Develop a core set of metrics—with meaningful input from Nigerien stakeholders—to measure 
change and collect baseline data in targeted communes 

 

6) Recruit and train the initial RGN team 

 

7) Develop an Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (if applicable) 

 

8) Create a learning agenda and refine the AMELP in consultation with the new Sahel 
Collaboration and Communication mechanism (see below for more information) 

 

9) Ensure coordination of shock contingency plans with other RISE partners 

 

10) Develop a shock responsive contingency plan in accordance with guidance elsewhere in this 
design 

 

At the end of six months, the Activity should present a revised life-of-activity design and updated 
annual work plan to USAID for discussion and approval. 

 

Flexible Funding 

The changing security environment, lessons learned during implementation, and many other 
potential unanticipated needs will require more fluid and flexible program planning. The activity 
will set aside three types of funds to allow the implementer to respond quickly and using 
innovative and creative approaches. 

 

Civic Engagement/Window of Opportunity Grants 

RGN is expected to include a window of opportunity grant fund. Applicants are encouraged to 
use these funds to test new and amplify proven approaches to building greater local government 
legitimacy, mobilize collective action to address locally-defined priorities, and elevate the voices 
of women, youth and marginalized populations in commune governance. 

 

Emergency Funds: Rapid Response to Unforeseen Opportunities and Challenges 

In parallel to all other efforts, the implementation of support to local government and civil society 
in the current environment may necessitate additional shorter-term activities. Therefore, in 
addition to specific assistance interventions, the Applicant should consider concepts for a rapid 
response fund (RRF). The RRF is meant to address unforeseen and/or unexpected opportunities 
and challenges in Niger’s fluid security environment. All requests must contribute to attaining the 
three objectives laid out in the Activity Description. 

 

Any activities resulting from the RRF will be subject to substantial involvement provisions, 
where applicable, and will require amendments to the awardee’s approved Activity Monitoring, 
Evaluation, and Learning Plan (AMELP). Either the Recipient or USAID may initiate an activity 
request under the RRF. If the RRF is not utilized as described above prior to the final year of the 
activity, the AOR or the Recipient may request that the RRF be realigned into the standard 
program funding with final approval authority with the Agreement Officer. 


Contingency Planning and Crisis Modifier 

Niger is subject to periodic shocks and crises in the form of drought, floods, price spikes, 
exchange rate fluctuations, and conflict, etc. Experience indicates that the activities specified in 
this Activity can contribute to reducing the severity of crises. If a crisis develops, it is imperative 
to use adaptive management principles to respond immediately to the crisis as well as maintain 
development gains achieved through activity implementation up until the crisis. Accordingly, 
Awardees will submit to USAID, within six (6) months of mobilization, a shock response 
contingency plan and $2 million of the total Activity budget of $19.8 million is set aside for a 
crisis modifier that allows the Awardee to undertake additional early actions or shock response in 
the event of a projected or current shock and/or crisis. More information on contingency planning 
and the crisis modifier is in the Staffing and Management section. 

 

Leveraging Collaboration and Partnerships 

Sustained improvements in local governance hinge in large part on how USAID investments 
support Nigerien ownership of reform and systems change. This is reflected in RISE II and RGN 
operating principles, and will underpin all RGN engagements with GON actors, civil society and 
other Nigerien stakeholders. RGN will place a premium on investing in relationships and playing 
a behind-the-scenes role31 in strengthening ongoing GON and Nigerien civil society platforms 
and other donor-supported efforts. 

31 See, for example, the Sidekick Manifesto: https://twodollarchallenge.org/sidekick-manifesto/ 

32 Collaboration outside of RISE II will be important when it comes to coordinating with Bridge partners, which may 
do similar work in the same communes. Bridge and RISE 2 civil society-focused interventions in particular, should 
be targeting citizen oversight differently, based on the project goal—CVE or Resilience. Supporting civil society 
networks at higher administrative levels, may result in overlap, but IPs are expected to collaborate within SCC and 
independently, to coordinate and deconflict interventions. 

 

RISE II involves multiple complementary USAID investments, and all RISE II partners are to 
work as a team, collaborating actively with each other and with relevant ministries and/or 
government agencies, local governments, other donors, key stakeholders, as well as other USG 
activities that are working in similar technical and/or geographic areas.32 RGN and other RISE II 
partners will need to work closely on development, refinement, and testing tools and approaches 
so they are locally-relevant, but also officially recognized, supported, and can be scaled up by 
commune and regional governments. USAID SRO has issued a solicitation for a new Sahel 
Collaboration and Communication mechanism (SCC) to ensure collaboration among RISE II 
partners and streamline communication for collective impact. To facilitate the collaborative 
process, all RISE II activities will be required to: 

 

● Proactively seek opportunities for joint programming that amplifies results 
● Describe joint activities in work plans that clarify roles and responsibilities around 
specific programmatic linkages with other RISE II activities 
● Conduct joint site visits with other RISE II partners, when appropriate, to facilitate 
learning across activities 



● Actively participate in USAID partner meetings and learning events, for the most part 
organized by SCC 
● Include a section in quarterly and annual reports on collaborative activities and synergies 
● In collaboration with other stakeholders (RISE II activities, GON’s reporting system, other 
donors), contribute to joint indicators linked to the RISE II results framework, related 
analysis, and the diffusion of reliable information 
● Respond to information requests and taskers coming from USAID’s Collaboration and 
Communications mechanism. Participate fully and actively in meetings and events 
organized by this mechanism. 


 

A continuum of additional USAID IP cooperation and collaboration opportunities could include 
regular meetings between Chiefs of Party and frontline activity staff; ‘speed dating’ events to 
identify cross-project partnering opportunities; joint work planning; training; field visits and peer 
learning events; co-location of offices; and pooling resources with other USAID activities.33 

33 USAID/Senegal’s Governance for Local Development (GOLD) activity offers some interesting models for 
fostering constructive cross-sectoral collaboration and leveraging resources. 

 

A list of current and planned RISE II activities can be found in Annex 4. 

 

Structured and opportunistic collaboration with USAID/Niger’s bilateral DRG and related 
activities will also be important for joint learning and impact, aligning approaches, avoiding 
duplication of effort, and consistent messaging to GON and other Nigerien counterparts. Annex 3 
includes summaries of core USAID/Niger activities. 

 

Cooperation With Other Development Actors 

RGN will operate in a very complex, fluid environment; communities face myriad contextspecific 
social, political, economic, and security issues, and a multiplicity of actors operating in 
their territory: Government of Niger (GON) deconcentrated authorities and security forces, 
international security forces, USAID and other donors, humanitarian relief organisations, and 
other international NGOs. 

 

A number of bilateral and multilateral development agencies and international NGOs are engaged 
in governance-related programming, including L’Agence Française de Développement, LuxDev, 
Swiss Development Cooperation, GIZ, the World Bank (which recently launched its 2018-2022 
Country Partnership Framework for Niger), and Oxfam. It will be incumbent on the RGN 
implementer to map other donor-supported activities in communes and with GON interlocutors to 
ensure complementarity and avoid duplication. RGN should work side-by-side with municipal 
authorities over the life of the Activity to strengthen their ability to take leadership for ensuring 
that all development actors active in their community are working in harmony and supporting 
locally-defined priorities. 

 


Alignment with USG Integrated Country Strategy (ICS) 

The activity closely aligns with and contributes to U.S. Embassy Niamey’s Integrated Country 
Strategy (ICS) 2019-2021. The activity will specifically support ICS Goal 1: Strengthen 
Democracy, Human Rights, and Good Governance in Niger. 

 

Alignment with Government of Niger Strategic Interests 

Niger has three main strategic frameworks, notably Vision Niger 2035, also called the Strategy 
for Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth (SDDCI); the Economic and Social 
Development Plan (PDES) 2017-2021; and the Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens (3N) Initiative, a 
food security strategy based on agricultural, forestry, and pastoral development. 

 

This activity aligns with the PDES 2017-2021, adopted in September 2017. The PDES 2017- 
2021 is the first five year plan that operationalizes the SDDCI Niger 2035, adopted in May 2017. 
The PDES 2017-2021 is also based on the GON’s Renaissance Program 2 articulated in its eight 
priorities: (1) promote cultural renaissance, (2) further consolidate democratic institutions, (3) 
ensure the safety of people and goods, (4) ensure access to water for all, (5) ensure food and 
nutrition security through 3N, (6) develop communication and energy infrastructure, (7) develop 
social sectors: namely, education and health, (8) promote youth employment. Under the PDES 
2017-2021, the GON specifically prioritizes the need to strengthen governance, including 
transparency and efficiency of public institutions, in order to improve public service delivery. 

 

Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) 

RGN is a core component of the RISE II project, and will contribute important learning and 
information on development results, strategies, and approaches to enhance community and 
institutional resilience in the Sahel region of Niger. Applicant’ MEL approach should allow for 
ongoing review, evaluation, and reassessment of program tactics and strategies, describe 
improvements in local governance and shifts in citizen attitudes about government legitimacy, 
and provide USAID with an analysis tool capable of informing shifts in resources and/or strategy. 
The Activity’s MEL system should reflect USAID’s CLA principles (see ADS 201.3.5.19) to 
effectively integrate real time monitoring and learning back into program implementation, and to 
ensure knowledge is shared with the broader RISE II community. 

 

It should include a clear strategy for monitoring and reporting progress made towards Activity 
purpose and results. The AMELP should describe how RGN will work with other RISE II 
partners, in particular the SCC mechanism, to support shared learning. 

 

USAID recognizes that the success of RGN will depend on the contributions of actors directly 
and indirectly engaged with the Activity. It will also depend on the actions of institutions and 
processes beyond the manageable interests of the RGN IP, and those changes in the local or 
regional context may have implications for the achievement of results. The RGN IP should 
regularly revisit its theory of change to assess whether assumptions continue to hold and 
indicators remain relevant, and may request changes to the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning plan (AMELP) with the concurrence of USAID. 

 

Applicants should consider how to: 


● Co-develop and manage MEL with key Nigerien counterparts and other RISE II IPs to 
foster joint learning and ownership 
● Create an authorizing environment and management culture that prioritizes CLA 
● Ensure a consistent data analysis approach among multiple RISE II partners and 
contributions to the RISE II collaboration and communications AMELP 
● Seek out and use existing GON and local government metrics wherever possible, and, 
where appropriate, select indicators from other RISE II activities 
● Partner with Nigerien research institutes, think-tanks and/or consultancies for political 
economy analyses and/or to provide feedback on programming approaches and for joint 
learning 
● Use complexity aware monitoring approaches 
approaches suitable to non-linear change pathways to capture how RGN is 
contributing to systems changes at different levels 
34 to track change and program impacts, 
such as context and sentinel indicators, outcome harvesting, and most significant change, 
as well as other 
● Document and share stories of change35 that capture important—if subtle—shifts in 
relationships, group processes and dynamics, in particular the engagement of women and 
youth 


34 Complexity-aware monitoring is appropriate for aspects of strategies or projects where cause and effect 
relationships are poorly understood, thereby making it difficult to identify solutions and draft detailed implementation 
plans in advance…..Projects (or parts of projects) that rely heavily on adaptive management to steer effectively in 
dynamic contexts, and projects that seek to influence social change or innovate to discover solutions are likely 
candidates for complexity-aware monitoring. 

35 The DFID-funded LASER program offers an example of an ambitious results framework that delivers ‘stories of 
change’ at the outcome level, and reports on ‘major and moderate’ results at the output level. 

 

The AMELP must demonstrate how RGN will routinely assess the quality of data; the status of 
interventions and whether they are resulting in their intended outcomes; whether critical 
assumptions remain valid; and whether course corrections should be made. It should clearly 
support the RISE II project-level monitoring, evaluating, and learning plan. It must be updated 
regularly, prioritize gender equality and youth inclusion, and include a data analysis plan that 
explains how certain indicators will be analyzed. 

 

If the Crisis Modifier provision or 10% flexibility for shock response described below is 
activated, the AMELP will be updated within 30 days of the date of formal notification from the 
Agreement Officer. USAID will review the draft update to the Plan and provide 
comments/suggestions within 14 days of receipt. The Recipient shall then submit one copy of the 
final update to the Plan to the AOR for approval not later than 14 days from receipt of USAID’s 
comments/suggestions. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $19,800,000.00 in total USAID funding over a five (5) year period. 

 

The award will include a $2 million set aside for a crisis modifier that allows the Implementer to 
undertake additional early actions or shock response in the event of a projected or current shock. 
The funding anticipated for this award will come from a number of different USAID funding 
streams including agriculture, nutrition, and private sector development. 

 

USAID reserves the right to make a single, multiple or no award as a result of this NOFO. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five years. The estimated start date will be on/or about 
April 2020. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

Award under this NOFO will be a cooperative agreement. Potential applicants should note that 

USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit to the recipients under assistance instruments. 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID will be substantially involved in the implementation of 
this Activity. The intended purpose of the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
involvement during the implementation of the program is to assist the recipient in achieving the 
supported objectives. It is expected that the AO will delegate the following approvals to the AOR: 

 

(a) Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 

USAID will approve annual work plans and the life-of-project exit strategy, and any subsequent 
revisions. 

 

(b) Approval of Specified Key Personnel 

USAID may designate as Key Personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. 

 

(c) Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 

When the Recipient's successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 

USAID's technical knowledge, the AO may authorize the collaboration or joint participation of 
USAID and the Recipient on the program. The AO may include appropriate levels of substantial 
involvement such as the following: 

 

1) Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the program 
will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the Recipient. USAID may 
participate as a member of this committee as well. Advisory committees must only deal 
with programmatic or technical issues and not routine administrative matters. 



 

2) Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards –including subcontracts to carry 
out work of a technical nature under the award (examples include, carrying out a study or 
a training of a technical nature, etc.). 2 CFR 200.308 already requires the Recipient to 
obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting out of any work 
under an award. This is generally limited to approving work by a third party under the 
agreement. 


 

3) Approval of the Recipient's Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 
(AMELP). 


 

4) Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. 


 

(d) Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity 

 The AO may immediately halt construction activity if identified specifications are not met. 

 

An award shall be made only when the Agreement Officer makes a positive determination that the 
Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management competence in 
planning and carrying out assistance programs and that it will practice mutually agreed upon 
methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. For organizations that 
are new to USAID, or organizations with outstanding audit findings, it may be necessary to 
perform a pre-award survey in accordance with ADS 303.3.9 and ADS 591.3.4.2. 

 

4. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937, 
defined as the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. Procurement of 
vehicles and pharmaceuticals and other restricted commodities are subject to the limitations in 22 
CFR 228, ADS 312, and ADS 310 and may require a waiver or Agreement Officer’s approval. 

 

For accurate identification of prohibited sources, please refer to 22 CFR 228 and Automated 

Directive System (ADS) 310 entitled “Source and Nationality Requirements for Procurement of 

Commodities and Services Financed by USAID. 

 

 5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Resilient 
Governance in Niger Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient 
will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. 
The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent 
with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 


 

6. Selection of Instrument 
1) The RISE II strategy and the design of its Activities, including RGN resulted from a 
robust, year-long co-creation process. This co-creation process, combined with other 
research, consistently underscored the long understood but relatively under invested 
challenge that good governance, specifically functional subnational government 
administration is essential for building the resilience of individuals, communities, and 
systems in the Sahel. Consultations with local government, partners, and other donors also 
provided examples of interventions and opportunities for coordinated alignment that will 
maximize resources and increase prospects for sustainability. The design approach for the 
activity plans to take advantage of USAID's emphasis adaptive management, Thinking 
and Working Politically to understand power dynamics and incentive structures 
underlying the targeted problem set, as part of the activity's implementation. This 
approach requires a flexibility and a willingness to learn and adapt throughout 
implementation, and an acknowledgment that the partner cannot know what solutions to 
bring to address a given problem before understanding the political economy in play. 
Following comparative analysis of options, SRO plans to implement RGN as an 
Assistance Award—the principal purpose of which is to transfer a thing of value (Federal 
Financial Assistance) to a recipient to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation 
authorized by law (the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, and other authorities 
as provided in annual appropriation). The selection of assistance by the technical office 
(SRO) best suites the transaction contemplated, and is the appropriate legal instrument to 
create the intended relationship (grantor-grantee) between the Agency and the recipient, 
for the Activity, rather than acquisition --a buyer-seller relationship for the purchase of 
property or services. Substantial involvement is expected between the Agency and the 
recipient when carrying out the activity contemplated. The selection is also consistent with 
the discretion and the flexibility afforded to the Agency by the FGCAA, FAA, and ADS 
Chapter 304. This speaks to the fact that acquisition - to acquire (by purchase, lease or 
barter) - property or services would require a specific set of outputs defined in advance, an 
impossibility given the design approach applied. 


 

2) The principal purpose of the recommended instrument (cooperative agreement) is to 
transfer a thing of value (Federal Financial Assistance) to the recipient to carry out a 
public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by law (the Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended, and other authorities as provided in annual appropriation). The 
selection of assistance by USAID/Senegal best suites the transaction contemplated, and is 
the appropriate legal instrument to create the intended relationship (grantor-grantee) 
between the Agency and the recipient, for the Activity, rather than a buyer-seller 
relationship for the purchase of property or services. Substantial involvement is expected 
between the Agency and the recipient when carrying out the activity contemplated in the 
cooperative agreement. The selection is also consistent with the discretion and the 
flexibility afforded to the Agency by the FGCAA, FAA, and ADS Chapter 304. 


 

3) This is a new activity, and therefore is not a change in instrument type. 


 [END OF SECTION B] 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Qualified U.S. and non-U.S. organizations (other than those from foreign policy restricted 
countries) are eligible to apply under this NOFO. Potential for-profit Applicants should note that, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.400(g), profit, which is any amount in excess of allowable direct 
and indirect costs, is not an allowable cost for Recipients of USAID assistance awards, and cannot 
be part of the activity budget. However, the prohibition against profit does not apply to 
procurement contracts made under the assistance instrument when the Recipient procures goods 
and services in accordance with the Procurement Standards found in 2 CFR 200.317 to 326. 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (possibly including a pre-award survey) by the 
Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective Recipient has the 
necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or 
ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the 
terms and conditions of the award. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

No cost-sharing is required for this award. 

 

3. Program Income 

 

USAID does not anticipate program income under this award. Implementers will need to consult 
with USAID if they generate program income to determine how it should be handled. 

 

4. Other 

 

Organizations may submit only one application under this NOFO. All applications received by 
the deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness and programmatic merit in accordance with the 
specifications outlined in Section D below. Applications should respond directly to the terms, 
conditions, specifications and provisions of this NOFO (including all portions of the program 
description). Applications that do not meet the requirements of this NOFO will not be considered 
for award. [END OF SECTION C] 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Primary: 

Name: Abdullahi Sadiq 

Title: Agreement Specialist 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: asadiq@usaid.gov 

Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

Alternate: 

Name: Chadwick Mills 

Title: Regional Agreement Officer 

Street Address: USAID/Senegal, c/o U.S. Embassy, B.P. 49, Route des Almadies, Dakar, 
Senegal 

Email: aasante@usaid.gov 

 Phone number: +221.33 879. 4000 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the email address of the 
primary and alternate agency contacts above with a copy to Aminata Diallo at 
amdiallo@usaid.gov and Hamed Cisse at hcisse@usaid.gov no later than the date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Any information given to a prospective Applicant 
concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an 
amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack 
of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

• Name and DUNS number of the organization(s) submitting the application; 



• Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address), clearly identifying if the contact 
person has the authority to negotiate the award, and if not, a person authorized to 
negotiate should also be clearly identified; 


 

• Program name; 


 

• Notice of Funding Opportunity number; and 


 

• Name and DUNS number of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify 
if any of the organizations are local organizations), per USAID’s definition of 
‘local entity’ under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

a) Technical applications may not exceed 25 pages, excluding attachments/annexes, and 
must be on 8.5 by 11 inch or A4 size paper, single spaced, 12-point Times New Roman 
font with one-inch margins on all sides, including consecutive page numbers, date of 
submission, and Applicant’s name on a header or footer.; 


 

b) If applications contain text boxes, they must be in no less than 10-point font, as to not 
unduly interfere with readability; 


 

c) The technical application must be in a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate; 


 

d) The Cover Page, Table of Contents, Acronym list, Executive Summary, and 
Attachment/Annexes do not count against the 25-page limitation. Any page in the 
technical application that contains a table, chart, or graph, not otherwise excluded above, 
is subject to the page limitation; 


 

e) All information from attachments/annexes must be referenced and summarized in the 
technical application and included in the attachment sections. All critical information from 
annexes/attachment that is clearly identified and summarized in the technical application 
will be evaluated as part of the basis of award; 



 

f) Additional documentation beyond the 25-page limit and the required referenced 
annexes/attachments will not be read or evaluated by USAID; 


 

g) Budget Narrative: Accompanying budget notes/narrative must explain the basis of all unit 
costs in each line item. The explanation must identify the factors upon which each 
estimate is based and show the arithmetic in reaching the cost figure; and 


 

h) The budget should be submitted in MS Excel format (software versions 2003 or newer). 
The Excel spreadsheet cells must be “unprotected”, and must not be zipped to allow 
USAID to view all formulas and calculations by line item. See Annex #1 for a sample 
Budget Format. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and the application will not be considered. 
Applicants should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, or as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor 
considered. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated 
documentation of delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to the contacts provided in Section D.1. Please do 
not submit applications through the Grants.gov website. Email submissions must include the 
NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application 
sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the 
technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. 
"No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email 
should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, 
Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once 
unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 


Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Senegal Mission cannot 
guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 10MB per email. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

The application must contain information that demonstrates the Applicant’s understanding of the 
program description and must be prepared in such a manner as to enable the review committees to 
make a thorough evaluation and arrive at a sound determination of whether the application 
responds to the NOFO. 

 

Unnecessarily elaborate brochures or other presentations beyond those sufficient to present a 
complete and effective application in response to this NOFO are not desired and may be 
construed as an indication of the Applicant’s lack of cost consciousness. Elaborate art work and 
expensive visual or other presentation aids are neither necessary nor wanted. 

 

Illustrative format for presentation of technical approach is as follows: 

 

a) Cover Page (does not count toward 25-page limit) 

b) Table of Contents (does not count toward 25-page limit) 

c) Executive Summary—2pages maximum (does not count toward 25-page limit) 

d) Technical and Implementation Approach 

e) Key Personnel 

f) Partnering Approach 

g) Management Plan 

h) Collaboration, Learning and Adapting (CLA) Approach 

i) Required Annexes (do not count toward 25-page limit): 

Annex 1: Draft Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (AMELP) (must not 
exceed 6 pages) 

Annex 2: Six-month Refinement Work Plan 

Annex 3: Organizational Chart 

Annex 4: Staffing Matrix 

Annex 5: CVs/Resumes of Key Personnel (must not exceed 3 pages each) 

Annex 6: Statement of Qualification (maximum 1 page per person) 

Annex 7: Key Personnel Letter of Commitment (maximum 1 page per person) 

Annex 8: Senior Staff Biographies (for non-Key Personnel) 


Annex 9: Letters of Commitment from Sub-Awardees (if any) 

 

a) Cover Page (does not count against the 25-page limit) 


 

See guidance in Section D.3 above for contents of the Cover Page. 

 

b) Table of Contents (does not count against the 25-page limit) 


 

The Table of Contents must include page numbers. 

 

c) Executive Summary (not to exceed 2 pages, does not count against the 25-page 
limit) 


 

The executive summary must describe the basic elements of the technical application. This 
section must include a problem statement, goals and objectives and summarize the key elements 
of the Applicant’s strategy, approach, methodologies, management, personnel and 
implementation plan. 

 

d) Technical Approach 


 

The technical approach must articulate the Applicants’ understanding of Nigerien political 
economy dynamic, the history and drivers of local governance reform, and outline possible 
program pathways, including illustrative interventions and focus areas. Of particular interest are: 

Refine and implement period: Applicant's plan for structuring and maximizing this six month 
period. 

 

Thinking and working politically: Applicant’s understanding of and approach to operationalizing 
thinking and working politically and embedding ‘every day’ PEA in program implementation. 

 

Outreach, coalition-building, and partnership: How Applicant will reach out to and engage 
with a broad range of actors in pursuit of all facets of RGN, including strategies for facilitating 
broad-based coalitions that have shared incentives and motivation for improved governance, and 
for building momentum for collective action. A well-articulated strategy for collaboration with 
other RISE II activities and USAID/Niger governance activities, and for leveraging other donor 
programs. 

 

Local ownership and sustainability: Applicant’s approach to building Nigerien ownership of 
RGN. How will the Applicant ground-truth strategies and do so across a broad range of Nigerien 
interlocutors? How does it enlist meaningful engagement and contributions to RGN objectives, in 
particular leveraging existing GoN resources and/or investments, to avoid, to the extent possible, 
the carrot of financial support? How does the Applicant gauge local ownership and ‘skin in the 
game’ to evaluate which interventions and issues have real political traction? 

 

Adaptive management: processes and practices Applicants will use to regularly assess the 
effectiveness of interventions and to adapt approaches to take account of changes in context and 
stakeholder interest. Applicants must describe how they will operationalize CLA and PDIA 


principles to build in feedback loops and opportunities to pause, reflect, and course-correct to 
ensure that interventions remain relevant, and to identify new/emerging windows of opportunity. 
Also of interest is articulation of how the applicant will create an authorizing environment for 
staff and partners to identify problems hypothesize and test solutions, and adapt programming 
approaches based on new evidence and learning. 

 

Measuring outcomes: Describe the short and medium term results they expect to effectuate, and 
suggest metrics to monitor progress. Applicants must articulate how these results are expected to 
contribute to addressing the core governance challenges outlined above. Applicants are 
encouraged to include sub-theories of change for each of RGN’s three objectives. 

 

Civic engagement/window of opportunity grants: Outline the Applicant’s approach to using 
small, catalytic grants to mobilize collective action to support locally-defined priorities, test new 
and amplify proven approaches to building greater local government legitimacy, and elevate the 
voices of women, youth and marginalized populations in communal governance. 

 

The technical approach should reflect learning from other governance interventions in Niger, 
including Peace through Development II (2011-2016), the Participatory Responsive Governance- 
Principal Activity (2016-2021), and REGIS-ER (2013-2019). 

 

Preliminary Activity Monitoring and Learning Plan 

 

Applications should include a preliminary AMELP that outlines how RGN will track progress 
(including an initial list of proposed indicators), identify learning opportunities, and effectively 
adapt programming to anticipate and respond to challenges and opportunities that arise. This 
should include one or more suggested learning questions for RGN, and how various MEL 
techniques and tools can support learning and document evidence about what is working—and 
what is not—in advancing RGN objectives. The preliminary AMELP should also describe how 
the Applicant will involve other Nigerien stakeholders, donors and, as appropriate, other Nigerien 
specialists (e.g. in academic or research institutes) in learning activities. For further guidance, see 
the AMELP section above. 

 

Staffing & Management Plan 

 

A management and preliminary staffing plan must describe the applicant’s financial and 
administrative management systems. It must include the proposed composition and 
organizational structure of the initial project team, describe team members’ respective roles and 
responsibilities, outline their knowledge and skill sets, and explain how each position is expected 
to contribute to the achievement of RGN objectives. CVs of proposed key personnel (not to 
exceed two pages) should be included, but do not count towards the technical approach page 
count. 

 

USAID understands that the initial staffing plan may be adjusted during the refine and implement 
period and that staffing and consultant needs will vary over the life of the activity. Staffing will 
be re-assessed with USAID as part of work planning and on an as-needed basis. Except in cases 
where specific expertise is not available locally, Applicants should prioritize the use of Nigerien 


staff, subcontractors, and consultants. Special consideration should be given to gender balance, 
and opportunities to engage youth as paid staff, interns, or volunteers. Strong applications will 
show evidence of proactive approaches to enhancing the percentage of women in field and 
management positions within the activity. 

 

Key Personnel 

Three (3) positions have been designated as key personnel: Chief of Party, Deputy Chief of 
Party, and Monitoring and Evaluation Advisor. Outside of these three positions, applicants 
are invited to think outside of the box about how to most effectively staff to meet RGN’s 
objectives and reflect RISE II and RGN operational guiding principles. Key personnel will have 
an understanding of Niger’s governance structures, political settlement, culture norms and 
practices, as well as an understanding of relevant governance linkages to other resilience sectors, 
with particular focus on the RISE 2 set of activities and technical approach. 

 

The Chief of Party (COP) will be the key point of contact for this activity with USAID regarding 
day-to-day implementation and management matters relating to the agreement. S/he will also 
have the overall responsibility for assuring that all assistance provided under the agreement is 
technically sound and appropriate, and for adequately managing and supervising all work 
performed under the agreement. The COP will provide strategic technical leadership and create 
an enabling environment that cultivates a strong adaptive and learning by doing approach. S/he 
must have significant experience in managing donor-supported development projects of similar 
size and complexity. The COP must have experience in implementing governance projects that 
engage and work across levels of government administration, and have included a significant 
emphasis on building civic engagement in governance processes. S/he must possess strong 
facilitation, communication, collaboration, and leadership skills, and a proven track record of 
building trust and working effectively with a range of government, private sector, civil society, 
and community-based actors on issues relevant to this activity. S/he must also have demonstrated 
experience and success leading teams implementing programs that use adaptive, problem-driven 
approaches; Given the complexity and scope of this activity, it is critical that the COP is dynamic 
and exhibits effective personnel and resource management, coordination, conflict resolution, 
facilitation, and decision-making skills. 

 

The Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) must be a public sector governance expert with experience in 
Niger or similar contexts. She/he will provide technical leadership for RGN and fulfill the 
responsibilities of the Chief of Party in his/her absence. The DCOP must demonstrate broad 
knowledge of key government, civil society, private sector, faith-based, and media actors who are 
potential allies or spoilers for RGN goals, and understand the dynamics and relationships among 
them as well as the political economy issues affecting these areas. S/he must have significant 
experience in managing and implementing donor-supported development projects of similar size 
and complexity. The DCOP must have the ability to communicate effectively on the technical 
aspects of implementation with a wide variety of stakeholders. S/he must have a proven track 
record in working effectively with other projects, high-level host country counterparts, and other 
international partners. 

 

The Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Advisor will play a critical role in operationalizing 
RGN’s adaptive, iterative management approach; s/he is not intended to serve as a standard 


‘M&E’ expert. S/he will be expected to develop and lead knowledge management programs, 
facilitate communities of practice and social networking, as well as facilitating organizational 
learning, change, and advancing foreign aid effectiveness. The MEL Advisor must have a track 
record in strategic, systems, and holistic thinking, managing resistance to change, and 
understanding of organizational culture, learning, and change management; demonstrated 
experience using political economy analysis/thinking and working politically to achieve 
programming objectives. S/he will also have demonstrated presentation skills that can influence 
decision makers and foster organizational change strategies, and experience implementing them 
within a complex organizational setting. 

 

Contingency planning and crisis modifier 

Niger is regularly subjected to shocks, both natural and man-made, that can have a significant 
impact on the efforts of local governments and CBOs to effectively deliver governance and basic 
services. Droughts, floods, disease outbreaks, and increasingly conflict, are common occurrences 
in the Activities proposed intervention area and are likely to impact the ability of the Activity and 
its collaborators to achieve and maintain progress, requiring adequate preparation for early 
response and sufficient post-event recovery. Ongoing insecurity in the region may also require 
urgent response. Applicants must demonstrate they have the necessary capabilities to respond to a 
wide array of emergency situations that would possibly impact the achievement of desired results 
for the Activity in question, and how they will rapidly (re)deploy Activity and other staff and 
resources, in close consultation with USAID, USAID's Sahel Coordination and Communication 
mechanism, and appropriate structures responsible for coordinating the response at the 
appropriate scale. 

 

Applicants should demonstrate they have the necessary capabilities to assist local partners and 
beneficiaries in identifying, mitigating, responding to, and recovering from shocks and/or crises 
that are likely to occur during Activity implementation. Applicants should rapidly identify and 
(re)deploy staff or relevant technical expertise, in close consultation with USAID and the 
appropriate structures responsible. 

 

Awardees are required to submit to USAID, within six (6) months of mobilization, a shock 
response contingency plan that outlines, based on selected (most relevant) shocks and stresses 1) 
the activities they will take in regular programming to reduce vulnerabilities and better 
prepare/respond to emergencies, 2) the ongoing monitoring and consultations they will perform to 
track potential and emerging crises or emergencies related to these shocks and stresses, 3) the 
activities they will ramp up or initiate in response to each type of emerging shock, and 4) the staff 
whose responsibility it will be to prepare for and lead shock response, 5) the activities they will 
add during the post-shock phase to ensure adequate recovery to pre-shock status (or better),and 6) 
participate fully in meetings and respond to information requests/taskers coming from USAID's 
coordination and communication mechanism. The development of the shock response 
contingency plan should be developed concurrently or aligned with the Six-monthly Work Plan 
and will be similarly validated on an annual basis. 

 

In case of a shock, the implementer can propose up to a 10% change in line items to finance early 
response actions designed to reduce loss of livelihoods, lives, and/or to protect development 
gains. Larger budget realignments may be possible, but will require agreement modification. 


Subject to the availability of funds, $2 million of the total Activity budget is set aside for a crisis 
modifier that allows the Implementer to undertake additional early actions or shock response in 
the event of a projected or current shock and/or crisis. Budget proposals should include a setaside 
line item for the $2 million crisis modifier to be used in the event of a projected or current 
shock and/or crisis should additional resources be made available to USAID for that purpose. 
However, in the event of a crisis or shock, the Implementer should not assume that this additional 
funding will be made available, rather their default should be to respond within the core budget 
envelope by adjusting activities and requesting USAID permission for adjustments that exceed a 
10 percent line item change. 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements); 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s); 














 

The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 





Instructions for SF- 
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 





Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 





Instructions for SF- 
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 





Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 





Instructions for SF- 
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 





Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 


c) Required Certifications and Assurances; 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 


 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 


 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Pre-award Terms Incorporated by Reference: 














 

The following pre-awards terms found in 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mba.pdf are incorporated into 
this NOFO by reference: 

1) Branding Strategy – Assistance; 

2) Marking Plan – Assistance; and 

3) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

 

e) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must 
contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The Applicant must 
ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as 
Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to 
support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

• Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex #1 for 
Summary Budget Template; 


 

• Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 



applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E; and 


 

• Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the Applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 
of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used 
and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the Applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental 
costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if 
any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, 
condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 



 

6) Construction – Applicants should not budget for construction in their application. The 
successful Awardee may propose to USAID specific construction activities post-Award, along 
with relevant budget re-alignment to be incorporated through an amendment. See Section 
A.10 above for further guidance on construction. 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200.414. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide 
the applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved NICRA and the associated 
disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than USAID, provide the 
contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a 
provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s 
Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA. 

 

Initial Application Requirements: 

Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs, but may not be double 
charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once elected must be 
used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity chooses to 
negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 
200.414(f) for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO. 


 

Initial Application Requirements: 

 

Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. 


 

● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one 
program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 


 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

f) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
Applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

g) Approval of Subawards 

 

The Applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the Applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization; 
• DUNS Number; 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list; 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM); 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list; 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred; 



• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b); and 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

h) Dun and Bradstreet, and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 


 

2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov); 
and 


 

3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to 
International Registrants. 

 

i) History of Performance 

 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent (not to exceed 3 years) history of 
performance on any cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements (not to 
exceed 5) involving similar or related programs as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 


• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
Applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the Applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a 
pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

Applicants should use the format provided in Annex #6: Past Performance Information of 
the NOFO to document the detailed information as requested. The completed forms should 
be included in the application’s appendix/annex. 

 

j) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

Branding 

Standard USAID branding and marking will apply to this activity. Branding and marking 
requirements for cooperative agreements are explained in 22 CFR 226. In accordance with the 
requirements discussed in 22 CFR 226 and ADS320, implementing partners will acknowledge 
USAID as RGN’s donor both verbally and in writing in all RGN documents and media, as well as 
during meetings, public events and technical assistance sessions with government stakeholders, 
local partners, and beneficiaries. 

 

Activities under RISE II must refer to themselves as part of the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced 
program in all written and official RGN materials and products. This includes radio and TV spots, 
billboards and other signage, and documents/materials used for any of the following audiences: 

● Host country national, regional and local government officials 
● Regional and international donors and/or organizations 
● RGN participants/beneficiaries 
● USAID staff (in host nation countries, regional offices, and Washington DC) 
● Local and international media 
● American public 


 

Acknowledgement that RGN is part of the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced program should 
include the following language: 

The (RGN Name) is part of USAID’s Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced program, which 
supports vulnerable communities in Burkina Faso and Niger to effectively prepare for and 
manage recurrent crises and pursue sustainable pathways out of poverty. 

 

RGN naming 


Activities under USAID’s Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) program should be named in 
a manner that will help all audiences understand the purpose of our work. RGN names should be 
clear, concise, and represent the work of USAID. All RISE II activities will follow USAID 
naming guidance, as noted in the USAID Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding 
Guide. Specifically, RISE II activities should adhere to the following guidelines: 

● RGN names should include a basic description of the project in simple language. 
Activities should use local language names when possible, or in French where a local 
language name is not feasible 
● RGN names should not include abbreviations or acronyms 
● RGN names may include USAID in the name, if appropriate 


 

Branding Strategy 

After technical evaluation of applications for USAID funding, USAID Agreement Officers will 
request Apparently Successful Applicants to submit a Branding Strategy, defined in 22 CFR 
226.2. The proposed Branding Strategy will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement 
Officer shall review for adequacy the proposed Branding Strategy, and will negotiate, approve 
and include the Branding Strategy in the award. Failure to submit or negotiate a Branding 
Strategy within the time specified by the Agreement Officer will make the Apparently Successful 
Applicant ineligible for award. 

 

Marking Plan 

After technical evaluation of applications for USAID funding, USAID Agreement Officers will 
request Apparently Successful Applicants to submit a Marking Plan, defined in 22 CFR 226.2. 
The Marking Plan may include requests for approval of Presumptive Exceptions. All estimated 
costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, labels, banners, 
press events, promotional materials, and the like, must be included in the total cost estimate of the 
grant or cooperative agreement or other assistance award, and are subject to revision and 
negotiation with the Agreement Officer upon submission of the Marking Plan. The Marking Plan 
will not be evaluated competitively. The Agreement Officer shall review for adequacy the 
proposed Marking Plan, and will negotiate, approve and include the Marking Plan in the award. 
Failure to submit or negotiate a Marking Plan within the time specified by the Agreement Officer 
will make the Apparently Successful Applicant ineligible for award. 

 

Required communications materials 

In addition to a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan, Awardees will be required to submit the 
following communications materials on a timeline specified by USAID, using guidance explained 
in USAID’s Graphic Standards Manual and Partner Co-Branding Guide and on 
www.usaid.gov/branding. As stated above, all written and/or official communications materials 
will acknowledge the activity’s role in the wider USAID Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced 
program. 

 

A. Within 2 weeks of the award: 
1. Press release - announcement of the award - with feedback from USAID/DOC 


 

B. Within 60 days of the award: 



1. A Communications Strategy submitted and completed with feedback from USAID/DOC 
and revised annually as the program matures 
2. Activity Fact Sheet completed with feedback from USAID, which will be updated 
annually 


 

C. Bi-weekly Updates will include: 
1. Links to media coverage of program and activities 
2. Content for social media, with text and captions for photos 
3. Forecast press events, social media coverage and communication products (newsletter, 
video, etc.). 
4. Event plans (in coordination with the USAID/DOC), with social media tool kit. 
5. Post-event write up and social media analysis with photos 


 

D. Quarterly Reports will include: 
1. One or two success stories submitted with photos (success stories could be submitted also 
at any time) to be edited with USAID/DOC feedback 
2. A pool of selected high-resolution photos showcasing program milestones and 
beneficiaries (all photos with identifiable people will have consent forms signed and 
submitted to USAID). 


 

E. Biannual communications products: 
2. One video (max. 4 minutes) submitted with full involvement of the USAID/DOC – 
including strategizing, storyboarding, script and captions. 
3. Large press event at milestone activities with full involvement of the USAID/DOC. 


 

RISE II communication strategy 

RGN will be expected to contribute to and participate in the implementation of a RISE II 
communication strategy developed jointly with USAID and other RISE II partners. 

 

k) Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Criteria 


 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be rated by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

2. Review and Selection Process 


 

USAID intends to award a single Cooperative Agreement from this NOFO. However, USAID 
reserves the right to make more than one award or no award if determined to be in the best 
interest of the Government. Each application submitted compliant with the terms of this NOFO 
will be reviewed according to the process set forth below. 

 

Committee members will examine the logic, feasibility and appropriateness of the technical 
approach, including responsiveness to cross-cutting themes, indicators and anticipated 
development results or impacts; quality and availability of personnel in response to stated 
qualifications or requirements; and several institutional factors. 

 

After evaluations have been completed, the Agreement Officer (AO), considering the SC review 
and the cost evaluation, will then make the final selection. USAID may engage in discussions or 
negotiations with the Apparently Successful Applicant regarding any matter to be covered in the 
final technical and cost application. USAID may also award without further discussions with the 
selected Applicant. 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

Applications will be evaluated in a two-step approach using adjectival rating in accordance to the 
criteria listed below in descending order of importance. USAID will conduct the first round of 
application reviews to identify top Applicants for an oral presentation to USAID. Proposed key 
personnel must be present for the Oral Presentation. Participation from the designated home 
office Project Manager is also encouraged. All travel costs associated with the oral presentation 
phase of the selection process will be borne by the Applicant. NOTE: USAID reserves the right 
to make award without Oral Presentation. 

 

First level of application review will be in accordance with the following criteria in descending 
order of importance: 

 

STEP I—Merit Review: 

 


Evaluation Criteria #1: Technical and Implementation Approach 

The technical and implementation approach will be evaluated on the extent to which the applicant 
provides a sound, dynamic and flexible, and innovative technical approach that takes into 
consideration and inclusively responds to the institutional, political economy, legal, and cultural 
contexts of Niger and outlined in the Activity Description. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #2: Key Personnel 

Key personnel will be evaluated based on the extent to which the staffing plan and proposed 
personnel complement each other and are appropriate for achieving the objectives of RGN. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #3: Partnering Approach 

The partnering approach will be evaluated based on the extent to which the application presents 
an effective strategy for identifying, engaging, and supporting a broad range of Nigerien 
stakeholders inside and outside government in addressing the activity objectives through a 
facilitated, Nigerien-led approach and its approach to ensuring and measuring Nigerien leadership 
and local ownership of the change process. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #4: Management Plan 

The management plan will be evaluated based on the extent to which the applicant convincingly 
demonstrates how its management approach and institutional capability will lead to successful 
and effective implementation of the proposed technical approach. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #5: Collaboration, Learning and Adapting (CLA) Approach 

The CLA approach will be evaluated based on the extent to which the Applicant articulates a 
system and process for integrating CLA in program management and implementation. 

 

STEP II—Oral Presentation: 

 

In the event of oral presentations in Niger or Dakar, the factors below highlights the requirements 
of this NOFO. Each presentation will be evaluated in accordance with the criteria listed below in 
descending order of importance: 

 

Evaluation Criteria #1: Overview of Technical and Implementation Approach 

Each applicant must present an overview of the general approach to the activity as outlined in 
their technical application. The Selection Committee will evaluate how well the applicant’s 
approach demonstrate an understanding of the context and reflects the guiding principles outlined 
above. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #2: Partnering Approach 

The Selection Committee will evaluate the process applicants propose to identify, engage, and 
support a broad range of Nigerien stakeholders inside and outside government in achieving RGN 
objectives. The emphasis should be on a facilitated ‘light touch’ in which local actors lead their 
own development efforts. The applicant should also describe how it will measure change in 
Nigerien leadership and local ownership. 

 

Evaluation Criteria #3: Staffing and Management Plan 


The Selection Committee will evaluate the key personnel’s understanding of the guiding 
principles specified above, as well as their ability to effectively and clearly present the general 
approach to the activity as outlined in their technical application. The presentation must explain 
the proposed mix of positions and management structure, and the comparative strengths of the 
proposed applicant and their partners. 

 

a) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 
CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a preaward 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

These documents may be accessed through the internet as follows: 

 

• 2 CFR 200: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title02/2cfr200_main_02.tpl 


 

• 2 CFR 700: https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/textidx?
SID=531ffcc47b660d86ca8bbc5a64eed128&mc=true&node=pt2.1.700&rgn=div5 


 

• ADS 303: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303.pdf 


 

• Standard Provisions for U.S., Nongovernmental Recipients: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303maa.pdf 


 

• Standard Provisions for non-U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mab.pdf 


 

See Section H, Annex #2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to awards 
resulting from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

• Financial Reporting: 


 

The recipient shall account for expenditures for activities carried out to ensure funds are used for 
their intended purposes. Financial reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 200.327. 

 


(a) Quarterly Report: The recipient will submit an SF 425, the Federal Financial Report, via 
electronic format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov) within 30 calendar days following the end of each quarter of the 
United States Government fiscal year. A copy of this form shall be simultaneously submitted to 
the Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and the USAID/Senegal Office of Financial 
Management. 

 

(b) Final Report: The recipient will submit within 90 calendar days following the estimated 
completion date of this award the original and three (3) copies of the final Federal Financial 
Reports (SF-425) to: (a) USAID/Washington, M/CFO/CMP-LOC Unit; (b) the Agreement 
Officer, (c) Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). The electronic version of the final SF 
425 will be submitted to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(http://www.dpm.psc.gov) in accordance with paragraph (a) above. 

 

Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ff_report.pdf and 

http://www.forms.gov/bgfPortal/docDetails.do?dId=15149 

 

Line item instructions for completing the SF-425 can be found at: 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/grants/standard_forms/ffr_instructions.pdf. 

 

• Performance Reporting 


 

The successful Applicant will provide the following reports, in English, to the USAID Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR) and the Agreement Officer, as specified below, in accordance 
with 2 CFR 220.327 and 220.328. The Recipient will use the standard form Performance Progress 
Report (SF-PPR) to report performance progress for the program under the award. 

 

Six-monthly Work Plans 

Based on findings from the refine and implement period, as well as previous experience, the IP 
will develop a work plan covering six months, with key assumptions, programmatic targets, 
results metrics, and proposed context and sentinel indicators, to be jointly agreed in consultation 
with the USAID AOR. This and subsequent work plans should also include a section on 
integration that outlines plans for engagement and joint activities with other RISE II and USAID 
Niger Office implementers and donor programs. 

 

Work plans should be developed with active engagement from key Nigerien partners and in 
coordination with other RISE II activities. They should ground-truth proposed approaches with a 
particular eye on how they: a) show evidence of local ownership and political feasibility; b) 
develop linkages between different types of development actors; c) are likely to yield tangible 
improvements for citizens; and d) support stronger citizen-state accountability relationships. 
They should define in detail how the RGN implementer intends to organize its work to implement 
the tasks outlined in the activity description and achieve expected results within each of the tasks. 
The work plans must be consistent with the AMELP. If necessary, and given USAID consent, the 
RGN implementer may revise the work plans. USAID reserves the right to review and reapprove 
work plans quarterly or on an as-needed basis. 


 

Crisis Modifier Supplement: For this Activity, the Crisis Modifier serves to fund the activity 
contingency plans, which are developed in conjunction with the work plan and approved by 
USAID. In the event that the Crisis Modifier developed in response to that below needs to be 
activated for a shock that is not covered by the active, pre-approved contingency plans, the 
Recipient will have two days to prepare a concise supplement to the contingency plan covering all 
activities covered by the Crisis Modifier for the current work plan, which should include, at a 
minimum, the evaluation of the new shock including threshold data and evidence of trigger, 
proposed interventions and geographies, and accompanying budget. USAID will review the draft 
supplement to the contingency plan and provide comments and/or suggestions within two days of 
receipt. The Recipient shall then submit one electronic copy of the final supplement to the annual 
work plan to the AOR for approval not later than one day from receipt of USAID’s 
comments/suggestions. 

 

Quarterly Reports 

The recipient must submit quarterly reports, covering each calendar quarter, within thirty (30) 
calendar days following the end of each calendar quarter (i.e. January 30, April 30, and July 30), 
limited to ten (10) pages, not including annexes. The report should include the following 
components: 

 

● Bulleted list of achievements in the quarter (1-2 pages) 
● Background and details of key achievements, identified ‘best fit’ practices, and or lessons 
learned, and observations concerning political economy dynamics, and what they may 
signal concerning programmatic adjustments (4-5 pages) 
● Describe collaborative activities and synergistic results (i.e. with other RISE II partners, 
USAID/Niger governance activities, government counterparts, other donors etc.) (1-2 
pages) 
● Key problems or issues encountered, how they were or will be resolved, and any 
recommended programming adjustments. The RGN IP is expected to be candid about 
approaches and activities that are not yielding progress towards RGN objectives. (1 page) 
● Bulleted list of planned activities for the next quarter. Provide with dates and locations for 
events. (1-2 pages) 


 

In addition, the following are required Annexes for the quarterly reports: 

● Annex 1: Table of indicators showing progress made during the quarter, cumulative for 
the fiscal year, and cumulative for the life of activity towards set targets. 
● Annex 2: Include a financial table which contains expenses of the reported period, year to 
date amount, and remaining budget line item amount 
● Annex 3: Two ‘stories of change’ with relevant high resolution photos, a podcast, video 
files, etc. as appropriate (see below for more information) 
● Annex 4: Quarterly Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Report 
● Annex 5: Quarterly Shock Response Contingency Planning Report 


 


Stories of change36: 

36 The DFID-funded LASER program offer example of an ambitious results framework that delivers ‘stories of 
change’ at the outcome level, and reports on ‘major and moderate’ results at the output level. 

Each quarter, the RGN IP must submit at least two stories of change that captures important—if 
subtle—shifts in relationships, group processes, and dynamics. These stories may be targeted at 
different audiences (e.g., GON, parliamentarians, youth, women, local private sector, U.S. 
Congress…), and produced in both English and local languages. Applicants are encouraged to 
think creatively about formats (e.g., radio spots, short podcasts or videos, blogs), and to co-create 
this stories with Nigerien partners, with a special emphasis on hearing the voices of women and 
youth. 

 

Annual Reports 

The annual report must include narrative and quantitative sections, and report against all 
indicators. The narrative section is limited to forty (40) pages, not including annexes, and should 
cover key achievements and high level impacts, synergistic results, scalability of results, 
collaborative activities, best practices, lessons learned, challenges encountered, and priorities for 
the next year. Annexes must include: 1) a comprehensive property inventory list 2) reporting 
against all indicators, 3) financial table, 4) at least one success story with relevant photos, 5) 
Annual Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Report, and 6) Annual Shock Response 
Contingency Planning Report. The annual report can be combined with the 4th quarterly report. 
The annual report shall be submitted on or before the 90th day after the reporting period each 
year. A French-language translation (the original report must be in English) of the annual report 
must also be submitted at the same time. The Annex 2 table for indicators must be submitted on 
or before October 15th of each year in order to be included in USAID's annual performance 
reporting requirements. For all results that either exceed or fall short of the annual target by 10% 
or more, a narrative explanation must be included. 

 

Geographic Information System (GIS) data 

USAID is required to make nonproprietary geospatial data available to the public. Data must be 
consistent with U.S. Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) level 1 metadata standards. 
USAID is in the process of developing standards and protocols for geospatial-related activities 
with mapping specialists for RISE. The awardee will be provided a copy of these standards once 
they are developed and will be required to abide by them. RISE II awardees are to work in 
collaboration with these USAID hired mapping specialists. All spatial and geographic 
information system activities financed by USG federal funds must comply with: 

a. OMB Circular A-16, Executive Order 12906; 

b. Automated Directives System (ADS) 507 (Freedom of Information Act); 

c. ADS 551 (Data Administration); and 

d. ADS 557 (Public Information) 

 

The awardee must submit to USAID the following items one (1) year after the start date of the 
award and on October 30 of each subsequent year: 


a. Digital spatial data according to Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) Level 1 
metadata standards capturing GIS at the regional, administrative, commune, and village 
level for their zones of intervention; 

b. Digital copies of spatial data with accompanying metadata; and 

c. Make spatial data available to the public at the cost of reproduction 

 

Final Report 

The Awardee must submit a final report in both English and French. The final report is due 
within ninety (90) days after the end date of the award. The report must include: 

● An executive summary of the activity's accomplishments, results and conclusions about 


areas in need of future assistance; 

● An overall description of the activities and attainment of results during the life of the 


award. 

● An assessment of progress made towards accomplishing the activity objectives and 
illustrative results, highlighting collaborative activities and synergistic results; 
● Significance of these activities in terms of impact and scalability; 
● Description of collaborative activities with other RISE II implementing partners as well as 
USAID/Niger governance programs; 
● Description of lessons learned and ‘best fit’ practices; 
● Success stories and full list of ‘stories of change’ documented over the life of the Activity; 
and 
● Observations and recommendations for future programming. 


 

This report should not exceed forty (40) pages (excluding annexes). The final performance report 
shall be submitted to the AOR/COR, and the Agreement Officer. A copy of the final results shall 
be filed with the Development Experience Clearinghouse online at http://dec.usaid.gov 
DocSubmit@usaid.gov 
or by 
email at: . The draft final report must be submitted thirty (30) calendar 
days prior to the completion of the award. Awardee will have no more than ninety (90) calendar 
days after the completion date of activities to submit a completed final report in English and in 
French. 

 

Close-out Plan 

No later than 180 days before the end of the Award, the Implementer must submit a close-out 
plan that details all equipment and provides a proposed disposition plan according to USAID 
regulations. The Close-out Plan must also specify actions that will be taken to hand over or 
transition activities to other partners, including local communities and governments. The Plan 
must specify sequencing of the closure of offices (if applicable), discuss sequencing of staff 
reductions, and include a communications strategy, activities, and products to highlight RGN 
accomplishments. 

 

4. Environmental compliance and climate risk management 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 


Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200/), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. The recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this Notice of funding 
Opportunity. 

In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 
otherwise directed in writing by USAID. USAID may in addition require environmental reviews 
or mitigation measures that go beyond those required under local law. 

No RGN activities funded under this cooperative agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental 
Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation.”) 

A Programmatic Initial Environmental Examination (PIEE) has been approved for the RISE II 
project to which this Cooperative Agreement (CA) contributes. The PIEE can be found in the 
Environmental Compliance Database at https://ecd.usaid.gov/document.php?doc_id=51010 . 
Prior to award, USAID will approve the Supplemental IEE specific to RGN and also make it 
publicly available in the same database. The PIEE covers activities expected to be implemented 
under this CA. USAID has determined that a Negative Determination with conditions applies to 
one or more of the proposed activities. This indicates that if these activities are implemented 
subject to the specified conditions, they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the 
environment. The recipient shall be responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to 
activities to be funded under this award. 

As part of their initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipients, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) and Mission 
Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing 
and planned activities under this CA to determine if they are within the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 

If the Implementer plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 


Climate Risk Management 

Per ADS 201, a climate risk management (CRM) screening is required for all USAID-supported 
activities, with limited exceptions. Climate risk is the potential for negative consequences on 
activity objectives and/or outcomes due to changing climatic conditions. The focus of climate risk 
management at USAID is on the risk to USAID development programming. The CRM process 
may also identify potential development opportunities associated with current and expected 
climatic and meteorological changes, including chances to achieve additional development 
objectives (including increasing climate resilience and reducing greenhouse gas emissions). 

 

Climate risks can be manifested through potentially severe adverse consequences for development 
programs resulting from the interaction of climate-related hazards with the vulnerability of 
societies and systems. A climate risk may arise when an activity element, target, or beneficiary is 
exposed to a climate hazard such as higher temperatures, flooding or drought. The level of risk 
increases both as the severity and probability of negative impact increases. Per USAID policy, 
moderate and high climate risks must be addressed in the activity design and/or during 
implementation. In some cases, the USAID design team may accept a/some risk(s) upon 
consideration of tradeoffs and how USAID can best achieve its development objectives. 

 

A project-level CRM screening analysis was conducted for the entire RISE II Project. An activitylevel 
CRM will also be conducted, during the activity-level environmental analysis process. This 
Activity will be required to incorporate all measures as selected and outlined in the CRM table, to 
be included in the Activity’s Supplemental IEE. 

 

The project-level CRM screening focused on primarily on two climate stressors (i.e., increasing 
temperatures and increasingly variable and unpredictable seasonal rainfall) and two primary 
shocks (i.e., increased flooding and the increased frequency and magnitude of drought). Three of 
these shocks and stresses (i.e., seasonal rainfall, flooding, drought) are related to both climate 
variability and change. The differentiated risks from climate to men, women, and youth need to 
be considered in all interventions. This is especially important as climate shocks and stresses 
(whether direct threats or underlying drivers) will materialize differentially among different 
populations and locations. 

 

Most people in the target zones derive their livelihood from water and rain dependent activities 
(e.g., agricultural, pastoralism), and thus are already at risk from the significant inter-annual 
variation in rainfall that occurs in the Sahel. This risk is likely to be exacerbated by an increase in 
variability and unpredictability. Changing rainfall patterns can act as a both a direct threat and an 
upstream driver of negative impacts in the health sector. For example, rainfall variability affects 
the accessibility of nutritious foods. 

 

Not only is rainfall expected to become more variable and unpredictable, but when rain does fall 
it is expected to do so less often and during extreme events. More rainfall in more limited events 
is likely to lead to increased flooding under some circumstances and in some geographies. Floods 
can wash away cropland, and less frequently, livestock, negatively affecting livelihoods. Floodinduced 
land and crop loss may affect women and youth disproportionately as they are often 
given more marginal lands. Floods can also wash away poorly sited infrastructure (e.g., irrigation, 
storage facilities, roads) that prevent people from being able to access markets as well as RISE II 


implemented trainings and capacity building activities. Such flooding effects are likely to be 
significant, but limited both spatially and temporally. 

 

Increasing temperatures have both near term (e.g., changes in disease burdens, increased heat 
stress) as well as longer-term (e.g., exceedance of crop tolerance thresholds) effects. Where 
appropriate, such impacts are considered within RISE II. For example, the potential shift in the 
viability of certain crops (e.g., maize) and livelihoods (e.g., farming) in some parts of Burkina 
Faso and Niger owing to increasing temperatures needs to be considered in the context of longerterm 
resilience. However, the time frame over which significant changes are likely to happen will 
allow for more opportunity to adapt. Therefore, while it is unlikely that rising temperatures will 
have a large direct impact on RISE II activities, the program seeks to ensure that the systems 
being supported are sustainable and realistic under future climate conditions. 

 

The biggest climate risk to the people living in the target zones, and thus to RISE II, is drought, 
both localized and large-scale. While droughts have, and will continue to, occur periodically 
across the Sahel, most studies suggest their frequency and magnitude are likely to increase. Many 
of these impacts are similar to those discussed under interannual rainfall variability. While RISE 
II envisions improved risk management, even these systems can be overwhelmed by a large 
enough drought or consecutive smaller scale droughts. For example, while social capital is one of 
the most effective means people have to cope with a drought, such capital is limited and can be 
used up during significant events. The most noticeable effects of a drought are those associated 
with the decrease in the productivity of rainfed agriculture and pastoralism (which often drive the 
negative coping mechanisms that lead to increased land degradation). Drought can also act as a 
direct threat to access to finance and insurance. In the face of drought, demand for credit can 
overwhelm institutional capacity in terms of liquidity and ability to assess dynamic risk profiles 
of potential borrowers. Drought can also hinder repayment, further destabilizing credit markets 
and institutions. Drought can also overwhelm poorly designed insurance schemes with too many 
payouts, or damage the credibility of others with not enough payouts or slow timelines to payout. 
While poorly understood, drought is likely to have a significant impact on migratory patterns, 
both temporary and permanent. While pastoralism is a drought risk mitigation strategy that has 
been practiced in the Sahel for generations, the growing realities in both Niger and Burkina Faso 
now limit its effectiveness. Even in good rainfall years some people in target zones have to skip 
meals during the lean season. During droughts a decreased intake of calories can lead to 
significant health problems, and even death. 

 

Climate risks should be adaptively managed during implementation, which should be reflected in 
the activity’s monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) processes. The Activity should, to the 
extent possible and practicable, utilize USAID’s Guide for integrating Climate Risk Management 
in its MEL planning and implementation. USAID’s Guide for integrating Climate Risk 
Management in its MEL planning and implementation can be accessed at 
https://www.climatelinks.org/resources/climate-risk-management-monitoring-evaluation- 

learning-and-knowledge-management. 

 

5. Other Requirements NA. 


 

[END OF SECTION F] 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

The point of contacts for this NOFO and for any questions during the NOFO process is: 

 

See Section D.1 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

1. Other Information: 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

2. List of Annexes 

 

a) Annex #1: Illustrative Budget Template (Attached Excel File) 
b) Annex #2: Standard Provisions 
c) Annex #3: Abbreviations and Acronyms 
d) Annex #4: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Foreign Registration 
e) Annex #5: SAM Quick Start Guide For New Grantee Registration 
f) Annex #6: Past Performance Information 
g) Annex #7: Rise II Results Framework 
h) Annex #8: Key Nigerien Interlocutors 
i) Annex #9: Key USAID/Niger Bilateral Governance Activities 
j) Annex #10: Other RISE II activities 
k) Annex #11: Bridge Objectives and Results Framework 


 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 


ANNEXES 

ANNEX #1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

An Illustrative Budget Template (Excel File) is attached to this NOFO. 

 

 

 


ANNEX #2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Standard Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. 
The award will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 



Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 



TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2014) 



RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 



Yes 

 

RAA4. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 



 

No 

RAA5. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



 

No 

RAA6. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT 
(APRIL 1998) 



 

No 

RAA7. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 



 

No 

RAA8. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING COUNTRY 
TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 



 

No 

RAA9. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 



Yes 

 

RAA10. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 
1999) 



 

No 

RAA11. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 



Yes 

 

RAA12. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 



Yes 

 

RAA13. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 



 

No 

RAA14. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 



 

No 

RAA15. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

No 

RAA16. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



Yes 

 

RAA17. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 



 

No 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 



 

No 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

No 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



 

No 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 




PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA22. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 
Yes RAA23. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 
No RAA24. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (DECEMBER 2014) 
No RAA25. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 
Yes RAA26. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA27. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 
No RAA28. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

Required Not 
Required 
Standard Provision 
TBD RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 
RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 
TBD RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (DECEMBER 2014) 
RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA5. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 
Yes RAA6. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA7. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA8. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA9. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA10. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA11. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA12. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING (JUNE 
2012) 
No RAA13. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 
No RAA 14. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 
No RAA15. PROGRAM INCOME (DECEMBER 2014) 
Yes RAA16. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 
No RAA17. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED IN 
USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 
No RAA18. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 
Yes RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 




FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 



Yes 

 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 



 

No 

RAA22. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 



 

No 

RAA23. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 



 

No 

RAA24. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

No 

RAA25. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 



 

No 

RAA26. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL ENTITIES 
(JULY 2014) 



Yes 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 



Yes 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 



 

No 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE (MAY 
2017) 



 

 

 


ANNEX #3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan AMELP 

Agreement Officer AO 

Agreement Officer’s Representative AOR 

Automated Directives System ADS 

Breakthrough-ACTION B-A 

Chief of Party COP 

Collaboration, Learning and Adapting CLA 

Civil Society Organization CSO 

Code of Federal Regulations CFR 

Countering Violent Extremism CVE 

Deputy Chief of Party DCOP 

Disaster Risk Reduction DRR 

Democracy, Human rights and Governance DRG 

Development Objective DO 

Development Food and Nutrition Security Activities DFSA 

Food for Peace FFP 

Global Food Security Strategy GFSS 

Government of Burkina Faso GoBF 

Government of Niger GoN 

Health Services Delivery HSD 

Initial Environmental Examination IEE 

Implementing Partner IP 

Millennium Challenge Corporation MCC 

Monitoring and Evaluation M&E 

Market and Nutrition M&N 

Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens 3N 

Non-Governmental Organization NGO 

Notice of Funding Opportunity NOFO 

Public International Organization PIO 

Resilience & Economic Growth in the Sahel - Accelerated Growth REGIS-AG 

Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced II RISE II 

Resilient Governance in Niger RGN 

Request for Applications RFA 

Sahel Collaboration and Communication activity SCC 

Sahel Development Partnership SDP 

Sahel Resilience Learning Activity SAREL 

United Nations UN 

United Nations Development Program UNDP 

U.S. Department of Agriculture USDA 

United States Government USG 

Violent Extremist Organizations VEO 

Water Security and Resilience WSR 

West African Economic and Monetary Union UEMOA 

World Health Organization WHO 


ANNEX #4 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW FOREIGN REGISTRATION 

 

 

 


ANNEX #5 - SAM QUICK START GUIDE FOR NEW GRANTEE REGISTRATION 

 

 

 


ANNEX #6: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION 

 



1. Award Number: 



 

2. Contractor/Recipient (Name and Address): 



 

3. Type of Award: 



4. Complexity of Work: Difficult Routine 



5. Description, location, and relevancy of work: 



 

6. Dollar Value of Work : Status: Active Completed 



 

7. Date of Award: 

Award Completion Date (including extensions): _____ 



 

8. Type and Extent of Subawards: 



 

9. Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address of the Awarding 
Contracting/Agreement Officer and/or the Contracting/Agreement Officer ’s Representative 
(and other references as applicable): 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #7: RISE II RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #8 – KEY NIGERIEN INTERLOCUTORS 

In keeping with the RISE II and Bridge operating principles, RGN will prioritize working through 
and with Nigerien systems, mapping, reinforce and improve existing platforms and institutions 
rather than creating parallel structures. 

At the national level, it is anticipated that RGN’s primary GON counterparts will include: 

Direction Générale de la Décentralisation et des Collectivités Territoriales (under the Ministere de 
l’Interieur, de la Sécurité Publique, de la Décentralisation et des Affaires Coutumières et 
Religieuses) 

L’Agence Nationale de Financement des Collectivités Territoriales (ANFICT), established in 
2008 under the tutelage of the Ministre de Finance and Direction Générale de la Décentralisation 
des Collectivités Territoriales (DGDCT), AFNFICT’s mission is to mobilize resources for local 
governments and support their operational capacity.37 

37 According to its website, ANFICT receives financial support from a number of development partners including the 
French, Swiss, Germans and Luxemburg. 

 

Haut Commissariat de l’Initiative 3N (HC3N - Les Nigériens Nourrissent les Nigériens, was 
created in 2012 with the objective to improve food security and reduce poverty by enhancing 
sustainable agricultural development and by improving the resilience of rural communities to 
food insecurity. 3N coordinates the actions of all governmental agencies working in the food 
security space. 

Centre de formation et gestion des collectivités territoriales (CFGCT), a dedicated agency for 
training of the elected body as well as the commune staff. (http://enam.ne/articles.php?pg=art11) 

AMEN: l’Association des Municipalités du Niger: is a gathering of the 266 mayors which has 
been created on May 2010. They meet annually to go through the challenges that communes are 
facing but also share lessons learned in terms of best practices that can be replicated in other 
communes. http://www.amn-ne.org 

ARENI: Association des Regions du Niger is composed of the regional elected councillors 
from the 8 regions. It is a similar body to AMEN with the same objectives but at the regional 
level. 

At the partner level, there is a Donor Working Group on Decentralisation and Local 
Development led by the French which includes, GIZ, UN agencies, Belgium and Swiss 


cooperation, USAID, and the EU. This consultative network meets every quarter to go through 
the Who does What, Where map in order to build synergies and better coordinate on the ground. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #9 – KEY USAID/NIGER BILATERAL GOVERNANCE ACTIVITIES 

Participatory Responsive Governance - Primary Activity (PRG-PA) seeks to promote good 
governance based on both increased citizen participation and Government of Niger (GoN) 
responsiveness. PRG-PA focuses on the delivery of priority services, particularly health, 
education, and security and targets three outcomes: 1) Elections are more responsive to priority 
public needs; 2) Improved multi-stakeholder (i.e. government, CSOs, donor community) 
contribution to specific elements of reform implementation for targeted citizen priorities; and 3) 
Increased capacity of key actors to promote participatory governance. 

 PRG-PA posits that constraints to development are best addressed at the local level through 
“collective action” between citizens and local authorities, with support from local representatives 
of the ministries. Specifically, local citizens and local authorities need the authority and capacity 
to jointly identify, fulfill, and monitor basic service priorities. Therefore, PRG-PA works to 
narrow the gap between government and citizens through both bottom-up and top-down 
strategies. Bottom-up initiatives include empowering local communities, social sector entities 
and local authorities through multi-stakeholder dialogues, building advocacy capacity, promoting 
social alliances among social sector CSOs and CBOs, providing communication and information 
and strengthening accountability mechanisms. Top-down initiatives include working with the 
national line ministries to decentralize and deconcentrate their control over services and respond 
to citizen priorities and needs, while at the same time increasing internal controls, performance 
measurement, and accountability. 

The GoN’s lack of adequate internal controls for the management of human, physical, and 
financial resources hinders effective hand-over to the local level. PRG-PA works with the 
inspectors general in each ministry, as well as with special GON agencies, such as the Haute 
autorité de lutte contre la corruption et les infractions assimilés (HALCIA), Cellule d’analyses 
des politiques publiques et d’évaluation de l’action gouvernementale (CAPEG) and High 
Commission for State Modernization (HCME), with mandates to make all levels of government 
more accountable and improve performance. At the same time, both local authorities and 
communities need capacity to monitor priority government services as their joint authority and 
responsibility increase. At the center of the PRG-PA program for community empowerment is 
the creation of Citizen Monitoring Committees/Comités de Veille Citoyenne (CVCs). PRG-PA 
provides accountability training to both the CVCs and local authorities. 

In addition, PRG-PA works with the media to improve public access to accurate and relevant 
information and provide a channel for advocacy of community priorities and needs in the areas of 
health, education, and security. PRG’s work in the security sector, under the U.S. State 
Department’s Security Governance Initiative (SGI) focuses on building confidence between 
communities in the Diffa conflict zone and the Nigerien Defense and Security Forces (FDS) who 
are fighting the Boko Haram insurgency. PRG-PA works with media and CSOs to increase the 
quality and quantity of information flows to encourage citizen collaboration with the FDS. 


A new Women, Peace and Security component is being added to PRG-PA that will center around 
three lines of effort: 

● Increase women’s participation in community dialogue and decision-making processes 
while improving their capacity in advocacy, leadership, and conflict mitigation. As a part of 
this effort, community needs, especially for women and girls, are identified and prioritized; 
● Partner and support targeted central and local government agencies and civil society actors 
to provide gender-responsive priority services identified by the communities to include 
focused mobile service delivery; and, 
● Improve communication and coordination between the GoN and security forces with the 
local population, especially women, to improve community security. 


 

Provide technical assistance to the newly created CENI and relevant GON institutions focused on 
the establishment of procedures and processes to effectively administer future elections. 

Participatory Responsive Governance – Government Accountability and Policy Activity (PRGGAP). 
This new activity will take an innovative approach to build coalitions for reform (demand 
side) while providing targeted assistance to national institutions willing and able to champion 
reform (supply side). The demand and supply-side efforts will be bridged via the creation and 
strengthening of mechanisms and spaces for multi-stakeholder, policy-level dialogue and reform. 
These approaches will be coupled with intensive donor coordination to catalyze critical policy 
reforms relevant to the successful implementation of major USAID development interventions. 
The totality of this activity should result in enhanced government accountability and 
responsiveness to citizen and sectoral needs and usher in an improved policy framework. PRGGAP 
is expected to be a three-year activity starting in early 2020. 

Promote a Peaceful Democratic Transition through Free, Transparent and Inclusive Elections in 
Niger This new $4 million, three year CEPPS associate award under the Global Elections and 
Political Transition (GEPT) mechanism will support a peaceful, democratic transition in Niger 
through free, transparent, and inclusive national and local elections in 2021. The Activity 
includes two objectives: (1) Promote political consensus on a revised electoral code, electoral 
processes, and procedures, and the composition and mandate of the newly formed CENI; and (2) 
strengthen the electoral administration capacity to conduct free, fair, and transparent elections, 
including the establishment of a biometric voter list 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 10: OTHER RISE II ACTIVITIES 

Food for Peace Development Food Security Activities: 

The Development Food Security Activities (DFSAs) are a key component of the RISE II strategy 
and will primarily focus on interventions at the household, community, and commune levels that 
will be tailored to address the specific needs of individuals in those zones, and are intended to be 
a foundation on which other RISE II activities will be built. Food for Peace (FFP) activities will 
strengthen households’ ability to identify and take advantage of transformational opportunities, 
learn, mitigate, adapt, invest and thrive, and also strengthen the systems around households to 
support transformational change. The investments will work in coordination with other 
investments by the U.S. Government (USG), the World Food Program (WFP), the host country 
government and other donors to benefit collectively chronically vulnerable populations in the 
RISE II zone 

Breakthrough-ACTION and other social and behavior change (SBC) activities: 

USAID will harness cutting-edge SBC expertise through Breakthrough-ACTION and other 
specialized mechanisms. These activities will develop, pilot, test and scale up SBC approaches 
and tools in collaboration with other USAID partners and partner governments. They will help the 
government at national and local level to design and implement SBC strategies and campaigns to 
promote high priority behaviors and other supportive behaviors. The draft scope of work for 
Breakthrough-ACTION is annexed. 

Health Services Delivery Activity: 

This Activity is meant to help strengthen and improve the quality of health, family planning and 
nutrition services provided by local clinics and referral centers. It will also strengthen government 
systems of support and oversight for village health workers, community engagement in health 
service delivery accountability, and assist in developing linkages among health services and with 
other development sectors. The Activity should work closely with the DFSA partners in the 
communes where they are present to ensure strong linkages between community level services 
and health facilities and support the health system to provide effective supervision and support to 
the community level. In communes where DFSA partners are not present, the Activity should 
provide important community level support for health, family planning and nutrition, and can 
learn from and adapt successful models developed by the DFSA partners. The goal, objectives, 
and expected results for this Activity are outlined in the remainder of this Program Description. 

Water Security and Resilience: 

SRO awarded a Water Security and Resilience activity to be implemented in Niger and Burkina 
Faso as an integral component of USAID’s RISE II project. It is designed to address the root 
causes of persistent vulnerability to food and water insecurity in Burkina Faso and Niger. It will 
build on current RISE investments, lessons learned, and will build resilience of vulnerable people 
to mitigate and recover from shocks like drought and floods. The activity will do this by working 
with local organizations and state institutions to improve water security, land use practices and 
management, and management of shocks, risks and stresses partnering with country government, 
civil society, and private sector partners in achieving long term self-reliance. 


Sahel Collaboration and Communication Activity: 

The purpose of the Sahel Collaboration and Communication Activity is to promote collaboration 
for collective impact among partners implementing the RISE II, Bridge, and SDP activities in 
targeted agro-pastoral zones in Burkina Faso and Niger, build the capacity for learning and 
adapting among beneficiary communities and select national government institutions, and 
enhance communications of RISE II and SDP activities. 

Markets and Nutrition Activity: 

This activity will support markets and livelihoods development (RISE II Objective 2) by 
supporting small ruminants and poultry production with a broad market-oriented perspective, 
expanding from RISE’s narrower value chain approach. The activity will include assisting 
producers to enhance their production to meet market demands. In partnership with the FFP 
DFSAs, the activity will strengthen market systems that provide safe, nutritious, affordable food 
in the RISE II zone. Access to finance and agricultural inputs, functional literacy programs (in 
areas where they are not being offered by others), and access to private veterinary services will 
also be supported. With potentially a component on youth and women’s entrepreneurship and 
business development, it would provide grants, coaching, training scholarships, and internships 
for diverse livelihood opportunities. The activity will also support policies that strengthen the 
business environment of the targeted market systems. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #11: BRIDGE OBJECTIVES AND RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

Goal Statement: Vulnerability to Violent Extremism Reduced in the Sahel 

● Development Objective 1: Legitimacy of violent extremist organizations and ideology 
weakened38 
● Development Objective 2: Government legitimacy enhanced 
● Development Objective 3: Economic opportunities enhanced in targeted regions 


38 This is the Project Purpose of the NEW-CVE Project 

 

Purpose Statement: USAID seeks to address the grievances that are the main drivers of violent 
extremist recruitment in the Sahel, which often stem from development issues: poor governance, 
lack of economic opportunity and perceived exclusion from the benefits and services provided and 
facilitated by governments in the region. 

Project objectives have been divided between USAID/West Africa (USAID/WA) and 
USAID/Senegal’s SRO. USAID/WA activities address DO1 of the results framework through the 
NEW-CVE Project; SRO is responsible for addressing DO2 and DO3 through the new Bridge 
project. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 


Shared NEW-CVE and Bridge (in yellow) 

Results Framework 

 


DO1 Legitimacy of violent 
extremist organizations and 
ideology weakened 

 


IR1.1 West African Capacity to 
Counter Violent Extremism 
Strengthened 

1.1.1 Greater understanding of VE and 
knowledge of CVE approaches 

1.1.2 Increased governmental and civil 
society leadership of CVE efforts 

1.1.3 Improved regional coordination on 
CVE 


IR1.2 Moderate Voices Amplified 

1.2.1 Positive local narratives 
strengthened 

1.2.2 Access to information expanded 

1.2.3 Dialogue and exchange on CVE, 
governance, and peace concepts 
increased 


DO2 Government Legitimacy 
Enhanced 


DO3 Economic 
Opportunities Enhanced in 
Target Regions 

 


IR2.1 Citizen-Government Dialogue 
Strengthened 

2.1.1 Constructive communication platforms 
established or increased 

2.1.2 Increased non-government 
stakeholder communication 

2.1.3 Media coverage of citizen priorities 



IR2.3 Access to Justice for All Improved 

2.3.1 Local communities better linked to formal 
justice system for targeted or communityidentified 
issues 

2.3.2 Targeted populations have increased 
access to functional conflict and dispute 
resolution mechanisms (mainstream or 
alternative) 

2.3.3 Availability and use of legal services 
improved in conflict/VE prone areas 

2.3.4 Citizens, inclusive of marginalized 
populations, are more aware of their legal rights 

 


IR2.4 Government Support for Human Rights 
Demonstrated 

2.4.1 Strengthened human rights organizations’ 
effectiveness in monitoring, documenting, and 
reporting rights violations 

2.4.2 Right to due process or redress in conflict/VE 
prone areas are respected by the government 

2.4.3 Education and civic awareness on fundamental 
human rights and freedoms for populations in 
conflict/VE prone areas increased 

2.4.4 Ability/Willingness of government to 
meaningfully address human rights violations 
improved 

 


IR2.2 Government Response to 
Priority Needs Increased/Improved 

2.2.1 More inclusive public policies and 
legislation created 

2.2.2 Delivery of basic services on targeted 
citizen priorities improved in conflict/VE 
areas 

2.2.3 Increased state ability to effectively 
manage conflict and address long-standing 
grievances 

 


IR1.3 Community Cohesion 
Increased 

1.3.1 Reduced tensions within and 
across communities. 

1.3.2 Increased trust within and across 
communities. 

1.3.3 Increased inclusion of 
marginalized groups in community 
dialogue and decision-making 
processes. 

1.3.4 Increased resistance of 
communities to radicalization and VEO 
recruitment 


IR3.1 Immediate Economic 
Stabilization 

3.1.1 Short-term income opportunities 
improved 

3.1.2 Livelihoods of affected communities 
re-established 

 


IR3.2 Increased Economic Resilience 
in Affected Communities 

3.2.1 Increased smallholder productivity 
and value-addition from crops, 
aquaculture, and animals 

3.2.2 Increased access to financial 
services 

3.2.3 Expanded and diversified livelihood 
and economic opportunities on-and-offfarm 


 


IR3.3 Increased Job Creation and 
Investment 

3.3.1 Increased investment and 
employment opportunities in secondary 
cities and “buffer zones” 

3.3.2 Public-private partnerships 
developed with private employers to hire 
or increase incomes for targeted 
populations 


IR3.4 Strengthened transferable 
skills 
(cross-cutting to DO2) 

3.4.1 Strengthened life skills 

3.4.2 Strengthened soft skills 

3.4.3 Strengthened functional literacy 

3.4.4 Strengthened entrepreneurial and 
business skills 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF ANNEXES] 

[END OF NOFO] 


