SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

 

SUMMARY 

 

USAID’s Women’s Economic and Social Empowerment (“Transform”) activity seeks to reduce the 
gender gap in economic and social opportunities between Pakistani men and women. This project will 
work primarily in the Newly Merged Districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (NMD/KP, the former Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas), Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), as well as other priority geographies to help 
women earn higher incomes, reduce inequality in economic and social participation, and reduce genderbased 
violence. Successful completion of this activity will create a more supportive environment for 
women's political, social, and economic empowerment. USAID seeks results-based, cost-effective, and 
creative solutions from local and international development partners and the private sector to achieve 
these objectives. 

 

PROBLEM STATEMENT 

 

Pakistani women - particularly in NMD/KP, KP, as well as South Punjab, Northern Sindh, Karachi, and 
Baluchistan - face several structural and socio-economic constraints that lead to unequal and inadequate 
economic opportunities for them. This results in economic disempowerment, which undercuts women’s 
control over decision-making in their homes, access to health and education services, ability to serve in 
leadership positions, and participation in business and public affairs. Moreover, communities vulnerable 
to crisis and conflict can further exacerbate this inequality and can contribute to instability in certain 
areas. 

 

Barriers to women’s economic and social participation include systemic underinvestment in women and 
girls, a patriarchal society that prioritizes the productive roles of men over women, limited control of their 
labor or its benefits, and a division of unpaid labor – especially for family responsibilities – that falls 
disproportionately on women. Most women who enter the labor force work in informal industries with 
comparatively lower wages and few legal protections. Women tend to work in sectors that are 
stereotypically considered women friendly or in spaces considered safe such as their homes. As a result, 
transitioning into non-traditional or high-value sectors, usually male dominated, becomes a challenge. 

 

These traditional cultural norms and attitudes undergird disparity in power dynamics between women and 
men and often reinforce perceptions and beliefs that women cannot be economically productive members, 
undervaluing the basic existence of women. Those who attempt to step out from these norms often face 
severe repercussions, including gender-based violence. Specific denial of women’s participation in 
economic activities is also a form of gender-based violence and can lead to more explicit and easily 
recognized forms of gender-based violence, including sexual and physical violence. Economic 
empowerment has the potential to reverse power imbalances between women and men. Greater access to 
and control of financial resources can enable women to rebalance gender-based power disparities in home 
and in local communities. 

 

 

BACKGROUND 

 

Over the last several years, the Government of Pakistan has made strides toward achieving gender 
equality. It has promulgated pro-women legislation on harassment in the workplace, and quotas for 
women in the national, provincial, and local legislatures, and in public sector jobs. New legislation now 
covers the prevention of domestic violence, women’s access to inheritance, protection against early 


marriage, prevention of acid crimes, custodial rights, rape and honor killings, family courts for marital 
disputes, and the establishment of the National Commission on the Status of Women. 

 

The 18th Constitutional Amendment in 2010 devolved authority on women’s development to the 
provincial Women’s Development Departments. These and other associated departments, such as Social 
Welfare Departments and Provincial Commissions on the Status of Women, plan, coordinate, and 
implement policies at the provincial level to increase gender equality. At the federal level, the National 
Commission on the Status of Women advises the Government of Pakistan on gender policy and the 
Ministry of Human Rights has the mandate to implement gender policies and regulations. 

 

Pakistan is a signatory to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
and the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Article 38 of the Constitution of Pakistan guarantees citizens 
the right to pursue economic opportunities irrespective of sex, caste or creed. 

 

Despite these significant efforts to improve the legal protections afforded to women, including in the 
workplace, legislation remains largely unimplemented resulting in continued discrimination and genderbased 
violence with impunity. In 2018, Pakistan ranked 148 of 149 countries (second only to Syria) in 
the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap index. Although statistics on the prevalence of genderbased 
violence vary across the provinces, the scale is tremendous and the consequences for individuals, 
families, communities, and country at large are devastating. According to a 2015 Aurat Foundation report 
on Violence Against Women in Pakistan, 713 women were murdered in honor killings, 65 were burned in 
acid attacks, and 1,515 women were raped. These numbers are likely understated, as a high percentage of 
sexual violence crime goes unreported. 

 

Women, religious minorities, and the urban and rural poor remain marginalized and disadvantaged groups 
in Pakistan. Women and girls in poor households bear a disproportionately high share of the poverty 
burden largely due to the cultural practices rooted in patriarchy. Poverty, cultural norms, and geographic 
isolation often obstruct Pakistani women’s access to education opportunities, starting at an early age and 
extending through secondary and tertiary education. By the time girls, reach secondary education, only 
34 percent remain enrolled. This contributes to significant disparities in literacy, with 45 percent of 
Pakistani women literate, compared to 68 percent of men. In most cases, women are not trained or 
provided with the relevant workforce development skills to become financially independent or be able to 
share the burden with family or a life partner. Their greater deprivation is due to a host of factors, 
including restricted mobility, lack of education and training, limited access to or ownership of resources 
and assets, discrimination in labor markets, and limited access to credit and social services. 

 

Reduced investment in women’s human capital, preventing and responding to gender-based violence, 
weak implementation of laws, compounded by the ideology of negative social biases, has led to fewer 
women participating in the formal labor force and leaving them economically vulnerable. However, 
women do participate in much greater numbers in the informal and agricultural sectors of the economy. 
The 2016 UN Women Report on Women’s Economic Status in Pakistan estimates that home based 
workers contribute approximately Rs. 400 billion or 3.8 percent of Pakistan’s GDP. Women’s economic 
contribution is neither acknowledged, nor documented in its entirety. The conditions of women workers 
in Pakistan’s informal economy, self-employment (micro-entrepreneurs), and those working on a piece 
rate basis (home-based workers) are even more problematic, due to the absence or weak implementation 
of labour laws and policies. 

 

Social norms in Pakistan lead to women’s overwhelming representation in unpaid care work. Women in 
Pakistan are 10 times more involved in unpaid care work than men. This is also manifested in lower 


literacy levels and lack of market-based skills among women and girls resulting in their sparse 
representation in high-skilled jobs. Providing access to a violence and harassment-free environment, 
affordable childcare, safe transport, residential services, and greater access to education and training are 
essential to encourage higher participation of women in the labor market. 

 

Although men-operated businesses also face difficulties, women-owned businesses frequently encounter 
additional challenges in Pakistan. Constraints include a lack of access to basic enterprise requirements 
that are more often available to men-operated businesses. They also include limited access to formal 
financing and marketing for products, difficulties in adapting to newer technologies, and limited access to 
skill development for themselves and their workers. Women additionally suffer from restricted rights, 
limited mobility, and relatively muted voice in shaping decisions that makes them highly vulnerable. 

 

The lack of property rights for women is a key constraint. This affects both accesses to finance as well as 
other dimensions of enterprise development such as decision-making power. Complicated procedures 
further erode the position of women entrepreneurs in joining the formal economy. This is compounded 
by the challenges they face in acquiring, managing, and retaining skilled labor. High registration, 
transaction costs and taxes also discourage women entrepreneurs when it comes to graduating from selfemployment 
to entrepreneurship. 

 

According to the government’s Labour Force Survey (LFS) 2017-18, women’s labor force participation is 
only 14.5 percent compared to men 48.1, representing a severe imbalance to male participation. 
Moreover, these numbers are on lower side compared to LSF 2014-2015. The Government of Pakistan’s 
key planning document, Vision 2025, recognizes women’s economic concerns and commits the 
government to increasing women’s labor force participation to 45 percent. However, this necessitates 
significant steps, including a comprehensive framework, to turn this commitment into a reality by 2025. 

 

These enormous challenges can be overcome if all stakeholders - government, civil society, bilateral and 
multilateral partners and the private sector, work together to encourage women’s economic and social 
participation which will lead to higher incomes for women that will translate in the well-being of their 
families, resilient communities and improve Pakistan’s economy. 

 

PROGRAM OBJECTIVES AND EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

 

Through Transform, USAID aims to empower women economically and socially, to reduce the economic 
gender gap and increase women’s access to information, resources, support, and institutions. The activity 
will engage men, boys, and community stakeholders to create an enabling environment that will support 
women in society and additionally reduce the incidence of gender based violence. The activity will also 
amplify the voices of women in their communities, and enhance their control over their lives at home, at 
work, and in society at large, and strengthen the role of women as peace-builders and advocates for 
stability. 

 

To achieve this goal, this activity has the following three objectives: 

 

1. Increased incomes for women-owned micro businesses and women workers, 
2. Expanded women’s economic, social participation, including in roles as peace builders in local 
communities, and 
3. Reduced gender based violence risk through advocacy and community engagement, particularly 
with men and boys. 


 

 


PROGRAM ACTIVITIES AND EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

 

USAID envisions three primary components that support each objective of its new Transform activity: 

 

1. Increased incomes for women-owned micro-businesses and women workers 


 

Component 1 seeks to help women earn higher incomes through targeted assistance to womenowned 
micro-businesses and women workers in selected value chains. Higher incomes, including 
from less volatile sources, is one of the key results of economic empowerment. It enables women 
to generate additional financial resources to support their well-being and to reinvest in their own 
productivity. It contributes to reduced economic insecurity, household poverty, and national 
development. 

 

Target beneficiaries will be the most economically vulnerable women in focus geographies, 
including in rural and urban areas. Micro-businesses and entrepreneurship represent challenging 
yet promising avenues for these women to raise their incomes and develop new skills in the 
process. Such economic ventures may include creating products, providing services, or reselling 
other products. 

 

This activity will adopt an evidence-based approach to establish, nurture, and grow viable 
women-led micro businesses. It should seek creative ways to address the constraints to growth 
for these enterprises including new entrants and help these micro-businesses to identify and take 
advantage of new economic activities. Successful approaches will incorporate survey 
information and additional analysis to target activities - including selection of value chain or 
economic focus - most appropriate to the geographic areas covered under this project. Key 
outcomes for this component include demonstrable increases in beneficiary incomes and greater 
linkages between participating women-led micro-enterprises and markets, sources of finance, and 
productive resources. 

 

Where it supports the activity’s approach, interventions should leverage sustainable partnerships 
with the private sector, including potentially larger firms and micro-finance institutions. 

 

Illustrative activities may include but should not be limited to: 

 

1. A geographic survey of industries in target areas with prevalent women-led microbusinesses, 
including opportunities for where women’s participation is possible but 
currently underutilized 
2. Business development services assistance for women-owned and led micro-businesses 
3. Skills development or quality control assistance that leads to higher revenues 
4. Provision of or strengthened linkages between women and financial services, productive 
tools, and technology 
5. Assistance to link women entrepreneurs and women owned micro-businesses to markets 
6. Use of technology solutions to virtually connect women to markets and resources, 
particularly in areas where physical access is limited. Any technology-based activities 
should consider access to the necessary telecommunications and internet infrastructure in 
target geographies, as well as the skills required to utilize them. 
7. Training, coaching, or mentoring that enables women micro-entrepreneurs to address 
sexual harassment (e.g. by customers or vendors) 


 

Illustrative indicators may include but should not be limited to: 


 

1. Percent change in income among female beneficiaries of USG assistance to microbusinesses 
2. Amount of credit or outside finance received by beneficiaries through USG assistance 
3. Number of women who have access to finance, markets and technology through USG 
assistance 


 

These activities and indicators are illustrative only. The Offeror should develop its own 
approach with activities that are most likely to achieve Objective 1. 

 

2. Expanded women’s economic, social participation, including in roles as peace builders in 
local communities 


 

Component 2 seeks to partner with local communities to expand women’s economic and social 
participation, as well as their roles as peace builders. Economic activity takes place against a 
backdrop of legal, regulatory, and cultural systems and practices. These systems and norms can 
create or limit economic opportunities for women as well as shape the incentives for women to 
pursue them. USAID believes that local communities are therefore key partners in overcoming 
structural obstacles and attitudes that limit greater women’s participation in the economy and 
larger society. 

 

Obstacles may include social and cultural factors, women’s ability to interact with and benefit 
from markets, access to resources, patterns of unpaid domestic and care work, limited mobility, 
and the prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence. Overcoming these will require greater 
dialogue among community leaders and an expansion of social space for women’s voices in 
economic decision-making. Communities may find common challenges and solutions to these 
issues and may benefit from greater collaboration with others. Networks between communities as 
well as the economic institutions that support women-led micro-businesses may help 
beneficiaries connect to a wider pool of resources, including those of labor unions, employers’ 
associations, women rights organizations, private sector organizations, micro-finance institutions, 
and local government. 

 

In addition to expanding their role in economic and social participation, the program is expected 
to enhance women’s roles as peace builders. Ensuring - and supporting - greater participation and 
leadership of women in conflict resolution, social inclusion, and peacebuilding leads to more 
durable and sustainable outcomes. Key outcomes under this component include greater women’s 
participation in social and economic activity in local communities, as well as positive changes in 
attitudes towards gender equality. 

 

Illustrative activities may include but should not be limited to: 

 

1. Creation or enhancement of community forums that support greater women’s 
participation in local economies and leadership in economic activity 
2. Establishment or strengthening of networks for women micro-business owners for 
mentorship, peer support, and other necessary resources to expand their businesses 
3. Assistance to help women bargain collectively on issues, including related to targeted 
value chains 
4. Engagement with industry associations, labor unions, micro-finance institutions, and/or 
local elected representatives to develop new economic opportunities for women workers 



or business owners, and help them in establishing mechanisms to address workplace 
harassment issues 
5. Engagement with family members to ensure greater women’s control over financial 
resources and role in financial decision-making 
6. Public advocacy campaign in support of women’s economic leadership and the rights of 
women within their communities 
7. Strengthening or establishment of women community networks, peer groups, and other 
necessary resources for deradicalization efforts, including enhancing women’s role as 
peacebuilders 


 

Illustrative Indicators: 

 

1. Percentage of participants reporting increased agreement with the concept that men and 
women should have equal access to social, economic, and political resources and 
opportunities 
2. Percentage of participants who feel capable to mentor neighbors and friends to identify 
early warning signs of violence or intolerance as a result of their participation 
3. Number of women in target communities in leadership roles 


 

These activities and indicators are illustrative only. The Offeror should develop its own approach with 
activities that are most likely to achieve Objective 2. 

 

3. Reduced risk of gender based violence through advocacy and community engagement, 
particularly with men and boys 


 

Component 3 seeks to reduce the risk of gender-based violence through advocacy and community 
engagement, particularly with men and boys. 

 

Gender-based violence reflects the power imbalance between women and men. Reducing the risk 
of gender-based violence is a necessary component of women’s economic empowerment. Social 
norms in Pakistan’s patriarchal society, particularly in conservative areas, restrict women’s 
mobility outside the home. Traditional cultural attitudes can discourage women as economically 
productive members of society and lead to the acceptability of sexual harassment and gender 
based violence, which act as a barrier to women’s participation in the economy. 

 

Component 3 activities will engage men and boys as well as other key stakeholders in local 
communities as key allies and primary actors in the prevention of gender-based violence. USAID 
envisions that activities under this component focus primarily on prevention, rather than direct 
service provision to victims of violence. The project will develop creative approaches for 
communicating and fostering discussion with men and boys, including creating positive role 
models. Successful approaches will consider how best to engage men and boys in different age 
groups (e.g. school-age, early adulthood, and late adulthood). Activities should be culturally 
appropriate for Pakistan’s context and explore partnership with networks of local schools, 
organizations, clubs, and other institutions capable of reaching larger audiences. Offerors should 
articulate promising community-based approaches to change social and cultural norms related to 
gender-based violence, particularly in NMD/KP and focus geographies of this activity. 

 

Key outcomes include positive changes in community attitudes towards the unacceptability of 
gender-based violence, greater awareness of gender-based violence services and support, and the 
institution or strengthening of mechanisms to protect against gender-based violence. 


 

Illustrative activities may include but should not be limited to: 

 

1. An activity-level gender analysis of target areas covered in this activity, within the first 
90-days of award. This analysis would complement (or potentially be part of) the 
geographic survey described in Component 1 of this activity. It would take place prior to 
and inform the approach and tailoring of interventions to local communities. 
2. Group education activities, including the participation of whole families, that discuss 
gender roles, misperceptions of social norms, and other issues related to gender-based 
violence 
3. Strategic media campaigns, including the creative use of social media 
4. Working with community groups, and religious and local leaders for positive messaging 
that affirms women’s rights to personal safety, agency, and freedom from violence 
5. Use of ICT technology to create safety networks, neighborhood watches, connections 
with law enforcement and organizations that help prevent and provide support for victims 
of gender based violence 
6. Community engagement to enhance women’s access to in-person and virtual resources 
and their presence in public spaces. Examples might include addressing sexual 
harassment in public and professional settings, including the use of transportation. 


 

Illustrative indicators may include but should not be limited to: 

 

1. Percentage change among target population with the statement that gender-based 
violence is unacceptable under any circumstances 
2. Percent of media campaign audience who recall hearing or seeing a specific USGsupported 
gender based violence prevention message 
3. Percent of direct and indirect beneficiary group who feel safer after specific interventions 
4. Number of mechanisms to protect against gender based violence strengthened 


 

These activities and indicators are illustrative only. The offeror should develop its own approach 
with activities that are most likely to achieve Objective 3. 

 

Geographic Focus 

 

This activity will have a special geographic focus on NMD/KP and KP. As conditions allow - or as 
opportunities become present - the activity may additionally be implemented in other geographic focus 
areas, including Southern Punjab, Northern Sindh, Karachi, and Baluchistan. Geographic targeting is 
expected to be flexible, adaptable, and ultimately undertaken in collaboration with USAID. 

 

Key Issues to Address 

 

Sustainability 

 

USAID’s journey to self-reliance development policy promotes sustainability, which encompasses both 
the sustainable achievement of development results and the use of environmentally sustainable practices. 
Sustainability depends on the commitment and capacity of local institutions and effectively harnessing the 
contributions of many local actors to produce results that benefit the people of Pakistan. A focus on 
sustainable interventions will help avoid inadvertent harm the people that USAID seeks to assist. Policies 
should consider how they will promote sustainability through: 1) local ownership, 2) the assessment of 
































outcomes after programs have ended, and 3) Strengthening the commitment and capacity of local systems 
to produce development results. 
The Recipient will submit a sustainability plan that describes how the impacts of these activities will 
remain effective after the life of the project and support the Journey to Self-reliance 
(https://www.usaid.gov/selfreliance) 
Gender 
Among other findings and recommendations, USAID/Pakistan’s gender analysis (see Annex III ) for its 
2018-2023 Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) noted that successful approaches to 
gender equality must focus specifically on gender-specific roles, relationships, social norms, 
attitudes, behavior, and balance of power. It identified engaging both women and men as necessary 
to address these issues. Additionally, it recommended that activities such as Transform 
employ locally contextualized implementation approaches. 
To empower women economically, the CDCS gender analysis noted that gender relations can be 
equalized by introducing alternative attitudes and behavior. These may include approaches that foster 
collaboration between men and women to jointly address economic and social challenges, including 
inequality in economic opportunity and the public presence of men and women (e.g., in the workplace, in 
public, or in public office). Successful approaches must go beyond “doing something for women” but 
address the underlying patterns that shape inequitable roles and relationships between women and men. 
This necessarily will involve working with women and men together rather than separately. 
USAID and other development agencies have advocated for elevating women’s roles - including 
leadership roles - in community peacebuilding efforts. The achievement of gender equality contributes to 
the prevention of violence and more sustainable peace outcomes in communities in conflict. Structural 
gender barriers, including those identified in USAID’s gender analysis and described in this NOFO, 
continue to impede progress. Successful approaches towards this goal must also contextualize activities 
with attention to local gender roles, relationships, social norms, attitudes, behavior, and balance of power. 
USAID/Pakistan’s 2018 Gender Analysis is included as an annex III to this NOFO. Offerors’ must 
integrate this - and the offeror’s own analysis - into the framework for designing approaches to fulfilling 
the goals and objectives of this activity. 
Engaging the Private Sector 
The private sector has a critical role to play in achieving sustainable outcomes. With a growing 
population and access to technology, private sector engagement is essential to find practical ways of 
making a fundamental difference in the lives of Pakistani citizens, particularly women. Successful 
approaches will also engage the private sector to understand its business challenges and priorities, and 
explore areas of mutual interest through initiatives that contribute to increasing gender equality and meet 
the private sector’s bottom line. Private sector actors are willing to engage in partnerships with 
development initiatives that will contribute to gender equality, particularly when initiatives contribute to 
firms’ business goals. However, identifying opportunities and operationalizing them typically requires 
extensive consultation and highly tailored approaches to fit each organization’s situation. 



The award recipient will submit a detailed plan that details how it will engage the private sector, including 
in ways that partnership addresses the systemic issues identified in USAID’s gender analysis. The plan 
should also propose how the intervention will remain successful after the life of the project. 


 

Monitoring and Evaluation 

 

Consistent monitoring and timely assessment of activities as well as the overall program are essential for 
successful implementation. Regular collection and analysis of both performance and context information 
will be necessary to ensure the activities continue to be aligned with and contribute towards overarching 
objectives. Successful approaches will work within the local cultural context of partnering communities 
and data will be used to validate or revise implementation. The regular analysis of this data should 
continuously inform and improve outreach, assistance activities, as well as operating procedures such as 
training logistics, grant requirements (if applicable), travel, and resources allocated to engaging men and 
women. 

 

The recipient will develop a Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) plan in order to ensure that the 
activity is contributing to overall objectives of Transform. USAID ADS 205 and ADS 201 requires sex 
disaggregation of people-level performance indicators and gender-sensitive indicators to help USAID 
understand how gender differences “improve or detract from the efficiency and overall impact of its 
programs.” To measure the progress against indicators, the Recipient will set the targets based on its own 
research and publicly available information, including government statistics, NGO statistics, and studies. 
The targets will be set with a mutual understanding between the Recipient and USAID that are realistic 
and contribute towards achieving the overall objectives. USAID/Pakistan has an internal database, 
PakInfo that will be used by the Recipient/s for recording targets and progress towards achieving results. 
An evaluation - with baseline and endline plans - will be developed by the Recipient to evaluate the 
activity performance and document lessons learned. Policy recommendations should be based on lessons 
learned and evaluations conducted as a part of the activity. 

 

Key Personnel 

 

The following Key Personnel are essential and necessary for the successful implementation of 
this activity. USAID designated the following Key Personnel positions: 

 

1. Chief of Party 

2. Technical Specialist - Gender 

3. Technical Specialist - Business Development 

 

The awardee may propose and justify a configuration of key staff positions, qualifications and 
roles in addition to or in substitution to those described below. Suggested qualifications and 
functions for key personnel include the following: 

 
Chief of Party: The Chief of Party will be responsible for the overall management of the project. S/he 
will supervise implementation and ensure the project meets its goals. S/he will also serve as the main 
representative of the project and the principal interlocutor with USAID/Pakistan and all activity 
counterparts for the purpose of this activity. 

 

Technical Specialist - Gender: The Gender Specialist - Gender will be the principal technical resource on 
gender for this activity. A successful incumbent should have significant experience working on genderbarriers 
in economic contexts as well as on gender-based violence. 

 

Technical Specialist - Business Development: The Business Development Specialist will be the principal 
technical resource on technical assistance to women-led micro enterprises for this activity. A successful 


incumbent should possess significant experience in development and working with micro and home-based 
enterprises. 

 

COMPLEMENTARY USAID-FUNDED AND OTHER ACTIVITIES 

 

USAID and other international donors fund development activities that have similar or complementary 
objectives to those outlined in this project. USAID expects that offerors avoid duplication or build upon 
work with these initiatives. Examples of ongoing activities include: 

 

Ambassador’s Fund Grants Program (USAID): This activity empowers vulnerable populations, 
encourages social entrepreneurship, improves responsiveness of government to citizens, promotes 
women’s empowerment, and builds resilience. Grants are likely to include assistance for women’s 
livelihoods and rights. 

 

Youth Workforce Development (USAID): These activities provide youth, particularly in Sindh and 
Punjab Provinces, with non-violent job skills and employment opportunities and exposes them to new 
ideas and people with different backgrounds with the aim of reducing the attraction of extremism and 
violent criminal activities. 

 

The Small and Medium Enterprise Activity (USAID): This activity supports female entrepreneurs by 
increasing their access to technology, markets, and finance. It also addresses inequities in policies related 
to business registration and regulation, access to finance, and entrepreneurship, and strengthens women’s 
chamber of commerce and business associations. 

USAID’s Maternal and Child Health (USAID): This activity works in Sindh Province to increase the 
number of trained health care providers that can reach marginalized women and children and improve 
equitable access to basic health services. It also educates local communities about family health issues 
and strengthens Pakistan’s newly-decentralized health delivery systems. 

AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION/APPLICABILITY OF 2 CFR 200 & 700 

This award is authorized in accordance with the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. 2 Code of 
Federal Regulation (2 CFR) 200 and 700 are applicable to an award to a U.S. organization made under 
this solicitation and to any sub-award to a U.S. entity resulting from this award. For US NGOs, the 
Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental Recipients (Non-US NGOs) referenced in ADS 303 will 
apply to any award or subaward. For non-U.S. organizations, the Standard Provisions for Non-U.S., 
Nongovernmental Recipients (Non-US NGOs) will apply. While, 2 CFR 200 and 700 do not directly 
apply to non-U.S. applicants, the Agreement Officer will use the standards of 2 CFR 200 and 700 in the 
administration of the award. 

 

 

END OF SECTION A 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

Subject to funding availability, USAID intends to provide $15- 20 million in total USAID funding over a 
five-year period for its new Women’s Economic and Social Empowerment (“Transform”) Activity. 
Actual funding amounts are subject to availability of funds. 

 

USAID intends to award a Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this Notice of Funding Opportunity 
(NOFO). 

 

2. Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The period of performance anticipated herein is a five-year period from the date the Agreement Officer 
signs the award. 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID/Pakistan will be substantially involved in the implementation 
of Transform activity. The intended purpose of Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) 
involvement during the implementation of the program is to assist the recipient in achieving the 
supported objectives. It is expected that the Agreement Officer will delegate the following approvals 
to the AOR, except for changes to the Program Description or the approved budget or key personnel, 
which may only be approved by the Agreement Officer. 

 

Elements of Substantial Involvement: 

 

1. Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plans 


 

● Approval of annual work plans 
● Approval of the final report 




 

2. Approval of Specified Key Personnel 


 

The following positions have been designated as key to the successful implementation of the 
program objectives of this Cooperative Agreement. In accordance with the Substantial 
Involvement clause of this award, these personnel are subject to the approval of the Agreement 
Officer: 

 

● Chief of Party (COP) 
● Technical Specialist - Gender 
● Technical Specialist - Business Development 




 

3. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 


 

The following collaboration or joint participation of USAID and the recipient of the Transform 
activity is authorized: 

 

● Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory or project steering committee members: 
The AOR will be involved in the selection of advisory or project steering committee 





members if the program will establish an advisory or project steering committee that 
provides advice to the recipient. The AOR may participate as a member of this committee. 
● The AO will approve sub-awards, transfer, or contracting out of any work under an award 
pursuant to 2 CFR 200.308. 
● The AOR will approve the Recipient’s Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan. 
● The AO and AOR will monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection 
because of interrelationships with other projects. 




 

4. Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity 


 

4. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for this program is 937 (the United States, the Recipient country, and developing 
countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited 
source). 

 

5. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to transfer 
funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Transform activity, which is 
authorized by Federal statute. 

 

The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and 
the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of sound management 
practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner 
consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. The Recipient using its own unique combination of staff, facilities, and experience, has the 
primary responsibility for employing whatever form of sound organization and management techniques 
may be necessary in order to assure proper and efficient administration of the resulting award. 

 

END OF SECTION B 

 

 


 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

All qualified U.S. and non-U.S. organizations (to include the United States, the recipient country, and 
developing countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a 
prohibited source) are eligible to apply. Pursuant to Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 200.400(g), it is 
USAID policy not to award profit under assistance instruments such as cooperative agreements, and as 
such, for-profit organizations must waive profits and/or fees to be eligible to submit an application. 
Forgone profit does not qualify as cost-share or leverage. 

 

To be eligible for award of a Cooperative Agreement, in addition to other conditions of this NOFO, 
organizations must have a politically neutral humanitarian mandate, a commitment to non-discrimination 
with respect to beneficiaries and adherence to equal opportunity employment practices. Nondiscrimination 
includes equal treatment without regard to race, religion, ethnicity, gender, and political 
affiliation. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, internal 
control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. Government standards, 
laws, and regulations. The successful applicant(s) will be subject to a responsibility determination 
assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the Agreement Officer (AO). 

 The Recipient must be determined a responsible entity in order to be awarded the cooperative 
agreement. The assessment will determine whether the prospective recipient has the necessary 
organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain 
them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the 
award. 

 

The applicant is reminded that U.S. Executive Orders and U.S. law prohibits transactions with, and the 
provision of resources and support to, individuals and organizations associated with terrorism. It is the 
legal responsibility of the Recipient to ensure compliance with these Executive Orders and laws. This 
provision must be included in all sub-awards issued under this Cooperative Agreement. 

 

Applications will not be accepted from individuals. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 


 

The NOFO will not require cost share. In an effort to enhance the prospects of sustainable development 
impact, the applicant must document as leverage the extent of political will, commitment, and 
collaboration it intends to receive from the national and provincial levels of the Government of Pakistan. 
Successful applicants who are requested to submit full applications will work with national and provincial 
governments to secure commitment to supporting and taking ownership of the interventions under the 
Transform activity. Although the NOFO will not require cost share, it will require applicants to provide 
evidence of their efforts to secure collaboration, political commitment and potential financial support 
from host government entities. 

 

 

END OF SECTION C 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Anthony E. Amerson 

Agreement Officer 

USAID/Pakistan 

C/o American Embassy 

Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5 

Islamabad 

aamerson@usaid.gov 

 

 

Maria Hassan 

Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Pakistan 

C/o American Embassy 

Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5 

Islamabad 

mahassan@usaid.gov 

 

 



 

2. Questions and Answers: 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to Ms. Maria Hassan with a copy to Mr. 
Anthony E. Amerson at the email addresses above no later than the date and time provided on the cover 
letter. Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be provided to all 
other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in 
submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application Submission 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be submitted in 
two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. This subsection 
addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please see subsections 5 and 6, 
below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and Business (Cost) applications. The 
Technical application must address technical aspects only while the Business (Cost) Application must 
present the costs, and address risk and other related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the following 
information: 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 
alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone number 
and email address); 
● Program name 
● Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the organizations 
are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 303. 


 


Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the application. 
Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the Applicant must be accompanied by evidence of that 
agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve only as a 
transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part of the merit 
review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent sections. 
Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and Applicant’s name. 
● 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 12 point 
Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted in 
Microsoft Excel and must be printer friendly. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no hidden 
formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to the Excel 
version at the Applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application submission is the unlocked 
Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may be 
considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should retain a copy 
of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than 1400 hours on May 27, 2019. 
Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in 
the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the 
receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to mahassan@usaid.gov. Email submissions must include the 
NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent by 
multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost 
application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For 
example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that 
states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application into a 
single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how to collate the 


attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic applications if no 
instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email to 
confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, please 
send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name if submitted 
via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than once unless there 
has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours 
occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in 
sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government 
infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, applicants 
are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/OAA/E3 cannot guarantee their acceptance 
by the internet server. File size must not exceed 15 MB. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The Technical 
Application must not exceed twenty (20) 8.5x11 sized pages excluding annexes. The application must 
demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this program. 
The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit review criteria found 
in this NOFO. 

 

(a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements, does not count towards page limitation) 

(b) Table of Contents (does not count towards page limitation) Include major sections and page 
numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit review criteria. 

(c) Executive Summary (One page, does not count towards page limitation) The Executive Summary 
must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical Application. 

(d) Technical Approach 

 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. While no 
page limit exists for the full cost application, Applicants are encouraged to be as concise as possible while 
still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must illustrate the entire period of 
performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, Applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the 
Agreement Officer to assess the Applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. Applicants should 
not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this listing 
with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 
b) SF 424 Form(s) 














 


The Applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms can be 
accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

 

 

Instructions for SF-424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424- 
instructions.html 

Application for Federal 
Assistance (SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424ainstructions.
html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF- 
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424binstructions.
html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the Recipient” 
document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition and 
Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2010 or later versions) with 
visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including itemization of the 
federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise inaccessible 
cells. The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed 
costs. The Applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in 
Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for 
costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by major 
budget category and by year for activities implemented by the Applicant and any potential subapplicants 
for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex II for Summary Budget 
Template 



● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to determine that 
the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the applicant’s program 
and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out by 
budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The Applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, and 
salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken down by 
specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The 
Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable for the services 
rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of the applicant. 
Applicants must provide their established written policies on personnel compensation. If the 
Applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, 
the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the Applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an agency of 
the U.S. Government, the Applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its approval. If an 
Applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the Applicant must propose a rate and explain 
how the Applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a detailed 
breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs 
of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of trips, 
the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the trips. Per Diem 
and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel policies. When appropriate 
please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company travel policy, and 
explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must include 
information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and quantity. The 
Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the basis for the 
estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and reasonableness in 
light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market conditions in the area; 
alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as the 
Applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report preparation 
costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other miscellaneous 
costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant should indicate the 
subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the 
objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 


7) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will charge all 
costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200.414. 
The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable 
supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 


 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your approved 
NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an Agency other than 
USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. Additionally, at the Agency’s 
discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award subject to audit and finalization. See 
USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs, 
but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this methodology once 
elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal entity 
chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
applicant must describe which cost elements it charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) 
for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is at the 
discretion of the AO 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that includes 
the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current 
year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, including 
categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel administration, and 
accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one program or activity, such as 
depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for 
the previous fiscal year and estimates for the current year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all programs 
and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to each program or 
activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de minimis rate, 
the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional supporting 
information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be under consideration 
after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the applicant’s requested method. 

 

 

 


Security Costs 

The budget must include security costs. The Applicant will provide USAID/Pakistan a security plan and 
budget for security costs as part of its application. The Security Plan and budget shall delineate and 
justify for reasonableness all costs and provide a coherent, overall integrated security plan that 
demonstrates that the Applicant has undertaken a thoughtful review of their security needs and includes, 
analysis of the various elements of a security plan. Applicants should consider any costs foreseen for 
security, as identified in the section below: “Sample Format for Initial Security Plan”, to include security 
equipment, security-related communication equipment, training, and guards required for program 
implementation. These costs should be included under “Other Direct Costs.” Security Costs shall be 
clearly identified in the cost application in a separate budget line item and must be included as part of 
the overall Applicant’s cost application. 

Security Format 

The Applicant shall submit a Security Plan and budget as a part of their application. The Security Plan 
shall be based on a credible threat analysis and risk assessment. The plan shall provide a coherent, 
integrated security plan, which demonstrates that the applicant has undertaken a thoughtful review of 
their security needs and includes analysis of the various elements of a security system showing how 
threats will be mitigated. The security budget shall delineate and justify for reasonableness of all costs. 
The security budget shall be complete and include comprehensive budget notes. The Security Plan and 
budget shall also include a point of contact to answer questions or provide clarifications regarding 
security throughout the life of the program. The applicant is encouraged to acquire professional advice 
from an expert of its choosing to assist in establishing an overall security plan/system. The security plan 
accompanied by the budget will be reviewed together with the technical and cost applications, and will 
need to demonstrate that the security needs to successfully implement the program description as 
presented in the applicant’s technical approach have been addressed/considered. 

 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements for prior 
approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any cost elements for 
which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the Applicant must specify and 
justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which cost elements require prior written 
approval. 

 

e) Approval of Subawards 

 

The Applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the time of 
award. For each proposed subaward the Applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● DUNS Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 



● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for mitigation. 


 

f) Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 














 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique entity 
identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each applicant 
(unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from requirements 
under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 
25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the Applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make the 
process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during 
which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a Federal 
awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, Applicants are encouraged to 
begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by the time 
USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not qualified to receive an 
award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start Guide 
and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, then to International 
Registrants. 

 

g) History of Performance 














 

The Applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its costreimbursement 
contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related programs, not to 
exceed five awards, as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last five years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at the 
organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information including 
telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the Applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information on its 
performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an Applicant’s history 


of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its review of the Applicant’s risk. 
The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is 
necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

h) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 














 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan to be 
evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting award 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding Strategy," 
describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it is promoted and 
communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 

 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to 
the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, 
such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of the 
application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will 
be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance 
instrument. 

 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as plaques, 
stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 
USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found 
on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the 
NOFO states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional 
or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

i. (ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 
with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 
when acknowledging contributions. 






 

ii. (iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 
identity. 






 

iii. (iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant 
must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 
program or project. 






 

iv. (v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 
competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 







consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 
logos. Section VI of the NOFO will state if an Administrator approved the use of 
an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 






 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including direct 
beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 
beneficiaries. 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and 
so forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID 
is from the American People.” 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, including 
any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 
related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, and if 
they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is adequately 
included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and 
the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and made part 
of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking Plan,” 
detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other items that will 
visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline 
“from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official marking for the Agency, and is found on 
the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the NOFO will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 
















 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no rights to 
the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 
















 


c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the Agreement 
Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 
















 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 
programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget portion of 
the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and 
will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other 
assistance instrument. 
















 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 
















(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that the 
applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the award, 
including: 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 
projects or other sites physical in nature; 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual productions, 
public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, informational, 
media, or communications products funded by USAID; 

(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 
commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
programs; and 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's identity. 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, exhibitions, 
fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the USAID Identity cannot 
be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support 
of the American people. 

 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 


(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 
deliverables; 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, and where 
the applicant will place the marking; 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID Identity, and 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation of why the 
exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID marking requirements 
would: 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 
independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 
applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or program 



goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of material for 
which an exemption is sought. 


(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy recommendations 
whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant must explain why each 
particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 
policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 
announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each particular 
item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or product. 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 
or commodity would impair its functionality. 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 
would not be cost beneficial or practical. 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 
must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm or 
otherwise be inappropriate. 

(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will approve 
or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure the above 
information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's 
cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved exemptions, 
will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, and will apply for the 
term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

i) Funding Restrictions 














 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance 
in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit written 
approval of the Agreement Officer. Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all 
commodities and services that will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the 
authorized geographic code specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and 
nationality requirements set forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

f) CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (August 2018) 


 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an employee 
of the organization has a relationship with an 8 Agency official involved in the competitive award 
decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of 
interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal considerations may compromise, or have 
the appearance of compromising, the obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. Should the 
applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the application, the 
applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days following 
discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 


 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware of that 
may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this financial assistance 
award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not limited to situations in which an 
applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-public information regarding a federal 
assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the 
preparation of a federal assistance funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action 
upon receiving any such notification from the applicant. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

 

End of Section D 

 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

1. Criteria 
The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters which the 
Applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which all applications will 
be evaluated. 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and prescribed by 
the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a Selection Committee 
(SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

2. Review and Selection Process 
a) Merit Review 
Criterion Identification – USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply 
with the instructions in this NOFO. The review of applications will be limited to the following three main 
criteria: Technical Approach, Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan, and Personnel and Management 
Approach. Each criterion will be evaluated in descending order of importance. Each sub-criterion will 
also be evaluated in descending order of importance. The evaluation of applications will be completed 
using the following merit review criterion: 

CRITERION CRITERION NAME 
Criterion 1 Technical Approach 
Sub Criterion 1.1 
Understanding of Women’s Economic and Social Empowerment 
(“Transform”) Activity objectives and results, including description of 
interventions and demonstrated integration of gender parity considerations 
Sub Criterion 1.2 
Understanding of socio-cultural context and policy environment with 
respect to women’s economic empowerment, gender equality barriers 
including access to resources and opportunities, and gender based violence 
Sub Criterion 1.3 Ability to complete Transform activity with results 
Criterion 2 Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Approach 
Sub Criterion 2.1 Appropriateness and effectiveness of the program objectives and expected 
outcomes, including indicators and interim and final results 
Criterion 3 Personnel and Management Approach 
Sub Criterion 3.1 Effectiveness and realism of proposed staffing plan to manage the 

29 


“Transform” activity 

Sub Criterion 3.2 

Key Personnel 



 

b) Applicant Instructions & Review Criteria 


 

CRITERION 
1 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Technical Approach 

IMPORTANCE 

Ranked as 
Highest 



 

a. Instructions to Applicant: The weight of this criterion is 50%, encompassing three sub-criterions. 

 

b. Evaluation Criteria: 

Evaluation of the technical approach criteria will focus on the extent to which it is well conceived, 
technically sound and takes into account the considerations identified in the NOFO. The technical 
application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. Evaluation will further be focused on 
the extent to which the proposed activities are appropriate, realistic, and directly relevant to the 
achievement of results. The technical approach will be evaluated in terms of overall quality. 

 

SUB CRITERION 
1.1 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Understanding of Women’s Economic and Social 
Empowerment (“Transform”) Activity objectives and 
results, including description of interventions 



 

c. Evaluation Sub-Criterion: 

Applications will be reviewed according to the clarity of the demonstrated understanding of the 
Transform objectives and results, particularly the focus on women’s economic, social empowerment, and 
gender based violence. Key aspects of this criterion include: 

 

● Clear articulation of key high-level interventions for women’s economic empowerment, 
particularly as it relates women-owned micro-businesses and women workers 
● Clear articulation of evidence-based approaches that reduce gender-based violence. 
● The feasibility of the technical and operational approaches to achieve those objectives, 
including expanded women’s social participation, and in roles as peace builders in local 
communities 
● The adequacy of the description of how the technical approach addresses all of the 
technical requirements specified in the program description. 
● Demonstrated capability to partner with private sector for achieving Transform activity 
objectives. 


 

SUB CRITERION 
1.2 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Understanding of socio-cultural context and policy 
environment with respect to women’s economic 
empowerment and gender based violence issues. 



 

 

d. Evaluation Sub-Criterion: 


The ability of the application to reflect a robust understanding of the current socio-cultural context and 
policy environment in Pakistan, particularly in the Newly Merged Districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and 
broader Khyber Pakhtunkhwa will be key to the review process. 

 

 SUB CRITERION 
1.3 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Ability to complete “Transform” activity with results 



 

e. Evaluation Criterion: 

The applicant’s demonstration of how effectively they have presented an evidence-based approach to 
achieve the results of the “Transform” activity. 

 

CRITERION 
2 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning (MEL) Plan 

IMPORTANCE 

Ranked less 
than criterion 1 
and more than 
criterion 3 



 

a. Instructions to Applicant: The weight of this criterion is 20%, encompassing one sub-criterion. 

 

b. Evaluation Criterion: 

● Evaluation of the MEL Plan will focus on the extent to which it is technically sound and 
presents an effective and robust monitoring and evaluation framework to ascertain 
effectiveness of the approaches. The MEL Plan will be evaluated in terms of overall quality. 
● MEL Plan articulates how applicants will monitor for unintended negative consequences as 
they implement their activities, and approaches to overcome risks. 
● Applicant will track and monitor women’s participation during project implementation. 


 

SUB CRITERION 
2.1 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Appropriateness and effectiveness of the program 
objectives and expected outcomes, including indicators and 
interim and final results 



 

c. Evaluation Criterion: 

Applicants will be assessed according to appropriateness and effectiveness of the program objectives and 
expected outcomes and preliminary list of realistic indicators, benchmarks and targets to measure 
achievement and success towards stated objectives. Successful MEL Plans will include illustrative 
indicators that measure outcomes in addition to outputs across each activity area. 

 

CRITERION 
3 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Personnel and 
Management Approach 

IMPORTANCE 
or WEIGHT: 

Ranked less 
than criterion 
1 and 2 



 

a. Instructions to Applicant: The weight of this criterion is 15%, encompassing 2 sub-criteria. 

 

b. Evaluation Criteria: 

The personnel and management approach criterion will be assessed based on the extent to which the 
proposed management structure supports the technical approach and convincingly demonstrates an ability 


to achieve program objectives. The personnel and management approach will be evaluated in terms of 
overall quality. 

 

SUB CRITERION 3.1 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Effectiveness and realism of proposed staffing plan to 
manage the “Transform” activity 



 

c. Evaluation Criterion: 

● Applicants will be assessed according to the effectiveness of the proposed staffing plan, 
which should also include the technical, administrative and finance support personnel 
required to implement the program (showing roles and responsibilities for Key and non-Key 
Personnel). Applicants should include an organizational chart as an Annex. 


 

● Applicants will be assessed according to the realism and effectiveness of the plans to manage 
the activity described in the application and to collaborate with local entities to provide 
sustainability, including, but not limited to, effective arrangements among multiple 
organizations, including cooperation with government structures and processes. 


 

SUB CRITERION 3.2 

CRITERION 
NAME: 

Qualifications of key personnel 



 

d. Evaluation Criterion: 

Applicants will be assessed according to the strength of the technical background and qualifications of 
each proposed key personnel, including: 

 

● Academic and relevant technical background and qualifications (including English language 
ability), and 
● Successful experience in providing technical assistance in developing countries presented in 
chronological order and in areas relevant to this activity: 


 

Chief of Party: 

o At least 10 years of professional experience in a leadership position in designing and 
advancing projects on women’s economic and social empowerment is required, 
preferably in a developing country. 
o Strong leadership, administrative management, presentation, reporting, and 
communication (both oral and written) skills and the ability to implement and 
manage projects with diverse subject matter expertise is preferred. 
o Master’s Degree or higher in a field of social science, international development or 
equivalent, gender studies, or a related field is required. . 
o Experience in managing complex development programs, financial management and 
negotiation skills that demonstrate ability to coordinate with different stakeholders in 
a complex and dynamic context. 


 

Technical Specialist- Gender: 

 

o At least seven years of work experience in technical implementation of women’s 
empowerment and /or gender integration activities in development programs. 
o Master’s degree in social science, development studies, gender, or a related field is 
required. 



o Experience in behavioral change communication is desired, particularly in areas such 
as reducing gender-based violence and engaging communities in addressing issues 
related to women’s participation in civic engagement or issues that restrict women’s 
ability to access resources and opportunities. 
o Experience working in developing countries, particularly Asia region 
o Strong interpersonal and communications skills required. 


Technical Specialist- Business Development: 

 

o At least seven years of work experience in business development programs, 
preferably in a developing country. 
o Master’s degree in a Business Development, Business Administration or a related 
field is required. 
o Experience in the development of women-led micro and home-based enterprises and 
workers is highly preferred. Also demonstrated experience managing people and 
processes in home-based enterprise ventures,, and leading teams to produce 
deliverables which will increase income of home-based enterprises and their workers. 
o Demonstrated experience in strategy development, with a strong emphasis on 
organizational position and marketing (leveraging results). 
o A solid understanding of key gender equality considerations, design, approaches and 
indicators for women’s economic empowerment and equality 
o Experience providing capacity building, including one-on-one or small group 
technical assistance, and creating related tools and resources. 
a) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award as a 
result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance with the cost 
principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial aspects of 
the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount requested; (2) whether 
the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable economy and efficiency; and (3) 
whether any special conditions relating to costs should be included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 2 CFR 
200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. entities, or the 
Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-award 
survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective recipient has the 
necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, financial resources, and 
technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply 
with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on the result of the risk assessment, the AO will 
decide to execute the award, not execute the award, or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

END OF SECTION E 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 








 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID anticipates 
that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby notified of these 
requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following policies and 
regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Nongovernmental 
organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 1, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting from this 
NOFO. 

 

Reporting Requirements 

 

Financial Reporting: 

 

● The recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a quarterly basis via electronic 
format to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.dpm.psc. ). The recipient 
must submit a copy of the FFR at the same time to the Agreement Officer and the Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR). 


 

● On a quarterly basis, the AOR may require additional information related to financial accruals and 
pipeline of funds. This information will help to ensure that the activity has adequate pipeline to 
conduct its programs. These reports/forms will be submitted when requested within 30 calendar 
days from the end of each quarter. In addition to this, Awardee will submit accruals reports to the 
AOR 15 days before the end of each quarter. 


 

Performance Reporting: 

 

● Annual Work Plans: The work plans for all USAID/Pakistan activities are aligned with the USG 
Fiscal Year Calendar (October 1 to September 30). The Recipient will submit its first work plan to 
the AOR for approval within 30 days of Award. The first work plan will cover the period from the 
start date of the Award until the end of the first USG Fiscal Year of the Activity – therefore the first 
work plan may cover less than twelve months depending on the date of Award. The AOR will 
provide comments within 20 working days to the Recipient and the Recipient will have 15 working 
days to respond and make all requested changes, after which the AOR will provide final approval 
within 15 working days. 


 

All subsequent work plans will be submitted to the AOR no later than 1 September and will cover an 
entire Fiscal Year, i.e. October 1 to September 30. The AOR will provide comments within 20 


working days to the Recipient and the Recipient will have 15 working days to respond and make all 
requested changes, after which the AOR will provide final approval within 15 working days. All 
work plans must be developed in cooperation with the AOR, other relevant USAID/Pakistan 
activities, donor programs, beneficiary communities, and all other relevant stakeholders as 
designated by the AOR. 

 

● Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan: The Recipient will submit to the AOR a life 
of project MEL Plan covering the full implementation period within 30 days of the Award (with the 
submission of the first work plan) that include Performance Indicators for the first year and for the 
Life of the Project (LOP). For all subsequent years of operation, the Recipient will modify the 
MELP to align with the annual work plan, if required by the AOR. The AOR will then provide 
comments within 20 working days to the Recipient and the Recipient will have 15 working days to 
respond and make all requested changes, after which the AOR will provide final approval within 15 
working days. 


 

● Quarterly Progress Report: Quarterly reports will summarize the following: program highlights, 
achievements, and major activities; budget information; problems encountered, proposed remedial 
actions and impact achieved against the objectives. The Recipient shall submit an electronic copy of 
a performance report to the AOR. The performance reports are required to be submitted quarterly 
(30 calendar days after the quarter). Please refer to 2 CFR 200.328 (b) (1). Along with the quarterly 
progress report, the Awardee will provide one success story (Telling Our Story) from its program. 
Success stories should be no more than one page. In addition, reporting will also be done through the 
mission’s online performance monitoring system. 


 

● Annual reports: The annual report shall be submitted within 90 calendar days after the reporting 
period the end of the first full USAID fiscal year and annually thereafter for each authorized year of 
performance. The Annual Performance Report shall follow the same format as the quarterly report, 
but with additional focus on cumulative accomplishments, progress and problems toward 
achievement of results, performance measures, indicators and benchmarks tied to the Annual Work 
Plan and the MEL Plan targets, for the quarter and the entire previous fiscal year, which runs from 
October 1-September 30. 


 

● Outreach and Communication Strategy: A communication and outreach strategy shall be 
developed on an annual basis and incorporated as a section of the Annual Work Plan. The strategies 
will include the overall communication message of the program, as set forth in the Branding and 
Marking Plan. The annual strategies must also focus on opportunities for USG visibility through the 
components of the project in terms of branding and marking but also with regard to events and other 
direct engagements. The project offers opportunities for signing ceremonies, graduation ceremonies 
and engagement with the NGOs and their target audiences throughout the course of the project. The 
strategy must ensure the use of traditional and social media. 


 

● Final Activity Report: The Final Report must cover the full period of the Award and contain an 
executive summary of the accomplishments and results achieved; an overall description of the 
activities and accomplishments; a summary of problems/obstacles encountered during 
implementation; an assessment of the performance in accomplishing the Activity’s objectives; 
significance of these activities; findings; comments, recommendations and other pertinent 
information. The Recipient shall submit the original and one copy to the Agreement Officer (if 
requested), the AOR, and to the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC). Submission 
instructions to DEC can be found at: http://dec.usaid.gov. 


 


• Short-Term Consultant Reports, Technical Briefs/Reports, Special and External Reports: If 
applicable, upon completion of the services of each short-term consultant, the recipient shall submit 
a report to the AOR summarizing the activities, accomplishments and recommendations of the 
consultant. This can be either in written or verbal form as determined by the AOR. In addition, the 
recipient shall provide copies of all technical reports including analyses, policy recommendations, 
comparative studies, etc. to the AOR as these are developed. 


 

• Closeout Plan: Ninety (90) days prior to the end of the Agreement, the Recipient shall submit a 
closeout plan to the AOR and the Acquisition and Assistance Office. The closeout plan shall 
include: brief program summary; brief program timeline; financial status report; final Financial 
Status Report timeline; latest NICRA or indirect cost rates; anticipated balance of federal funds after 
expiration of the instrument; final inventory of residual non- expendable property, which was 
acquired or furnished under the instrument; program and activity end date; recipient responsibilities 
during phase out; Sub Awardees and/or partnership phase out; status of all program audit reports per 
the instrument’s provisions; final audit report timeline; final report timeline; personnel phase-out 
timeline; personnel phase-out plan; and job descriptions for personnel anticipated to serve during the 
closeout phase. 


 

● Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements: The Recipient shall be required to 
submit any technical reports produced under this program, in English, to USAID’s Development 
Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) according to the instructions found at 
https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/content/submit.aspx 


 

● Foreign Tax Reports: Standard report will be issued for each Fiscal Year and delivered prior to 
April 16th of each year. 


 

Branding & Marking: 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be required to submit a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan to 
be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer. A Branding Implementation Strategy and 
Marking Plan must be in accordance with USAID Branding and Marking Plan as required per ADS 320 
at the following link: https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/320.pdf. See 2 CFR or, 
for non-U.S. organizations, see the provision entitled “Marking and Public Communications Under 
USAID-Funded Assistance”. 

 

The Recipient must comply with the requirements of the USAID “Graphic Standards Manual” available 
at www.usaid.gov/branding, or any successor branding policy. 

 

Environmental Compliance: 

 

A. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117, requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s ADS 204, which 
require that any potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities be identified prior 
to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all 
activities. In case of a conflict between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall 
govern. The Recipient’s environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and 
procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 






 


No activity funded under this Cooperative Agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau 
Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

 

B. An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for this activity is currently in draft; however, has not 
yet been signed by the Bureau Environmental officer at USAID/Washington. The IEE covers 
activities expected to be implemented under this Cooperative Agreement. USAID expects that a 
Negative Determination with Conditions (NDC) will apply to one or more of the proposed 
activities. This indicates that if these activities are implemented subject to the specified conditions, 
they are expected to have no significant adverse effect on the environment. The applicant shall be 
responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be funded under this 
solicitation. 






 

C. As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) and Mission 
Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing 
and planned activities under this Cooperative Agreement to determine if they are within the scope 
of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 






 

If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 
environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for USAID 
review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving written USAID 
approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 

Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 

216 environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 
submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

 

D. For activities with NDC including procurement of medical equipment, supplies, furniture and/or 
office equipment, the following actions are required: 






 

The implementer is required to ensure that equipment, commodities (see also ADS 312) and 
materials are procured from certified retailers; environmental safety and quality certificates 
conforming with national and/or international standards are available; equipment and materials are 
used in an environmentally sound and safe manner, properly disposed of when applicable at the 
end of their useful life in a manner consistent with best management practices according to USG, 
European Union or equivalent standards acceptable to USAID. 

 

 

Environmental Due Diligence Form (EDF) in the form of Environmental Review and Assessment 
Checklist is required to identify environmental effects, develop Environmental Manual and 
Mitigation and Monitoring Plans when applicable, confirm/ neglect and mitigate a potentially 
significant adverse effect approved by the Mission Environment Officer (MEO). 

 

Since the approved Regulation 216 documentation is (1) an IEE that contains one or more Negative 
Determinations with conditions, the recipient shall: 

 


● Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete environmental 
mitigation and monitoring plan (EMMP) or a project mitigation and monitoring (M&M) 
plan, the recipient shall prepare an EMMP or M&M Plan describing how the recipient 
will, in specific terms, implement all IEE and/or EA conditions that apply to proposed 
project activities within the scope of the award. The EMMP or M&M Plan shall include 
monitoring the implementation of the conditions and their effectiveness approved by the 
MEO. 


 

● Integrate a completed EMMP or M&M Plan into the initial work plan. 


 

● Integrate an EMMP or M&M Plan into subsequent Annual Work Plans, making any 
necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverse impacts 
to the environment. 


 

E. A provision for sub-grants is included under this award; therefore, the recipient will be required to 
use an Environmental Review Form (ERF) or Environmental Review (ER) checklist using impact 
assessment tools to screen grant proposals to ensure the funded proposals will result in no adverse 
environmental impact, to develop mitigation measures, as necessary, and to specify monitoring and 
reporting. Use of the ERF or ER checklist is called for when the nature of the grant proposals to be 
funded is not well enough known to make an informed decision about their potential environmental 
impacts, yet due to the type and extent of activities to be funded, any adverse impacts are expected 
to be easily mitigated. Implementation of sub-grant activities cannot go forward until the ERF or 
ER checklist is completed and approved by USAID. Recipient is responsible for ensuring that 
mitigation measures specified by the ERF or ER checklist process are implemented. 






 

The recipient will be responsible for periodic reporting to the USAID AOR as specified in 
the Schedule/Program Description of this solicitation. 

 

SPECIAL AGREEMENT PROVISIONS: 

 

I. EXECUTIVE ORDER ON TERRORISM FINANCING (FEB 2002) 

 

The Recipient is reminded that U.S. Executive Orders and U.S. law prohibits transactions with, and the 
provision of resources and support to, individuals and organizations associated with terrorism. It is the 
responsibility of the contractor/recipient to ensure compliance with these Executive Orders and laws. 
This provision must be included in all subcontracts/sub awards issued under this contract/agreement. 

 

II. SECURITY REPORTING REQUIREMENT: 

 

a) Security Conditions 


 

The Recipient must be aware of security conditions in Pakistan, and by entering into an agreement, 
assumes full responsibility for the safety of its employees. Prior to commencing work, the Recipient shall 
ensure that it has adequate procedures in place to advise its employees of situations or changed conditions 
that could adversely affect their security. In order to keep abreast of security conditions in Pakistan, the 
Recipient shall seek information from all available sources, including the USAID Pakistan EXO/Safety & 
Security Office (SSO), for all areas in which its employees work or travel. The Recipient acknowledges 
that security conditions are subject to change at any moment, that USAID cannot guarantee the accuracy 
of any information that it may provide to the Recipient and that USAID assumes no responsibility for the 
reliability of such information. The Recipient has sole responsibility for anticipating, scheduling, 


budgeting, receiving country clearance and securing required AOR and Agreement Officer approvals for 
all travel for its employees and/or his/her dependents traveling to post if accompanied by dependents is 
allowed by the Recipient’s personnel internal policies. The Recipient shall also be responsible for 
immediately notifying USAID Pakistan and the U.S. Embassy American Citizen Services section in the 
event a U.S. citizen employee does not return from travel as expected or does not report to work. In the 
event that USAID requests the Recipient to do so, the Recipient's Chief of Party (COP) shall assume 
responsibility for contacting all of its employees. The Recipient shall provide to the USAID Pakistan 
EXO/SSO the name, current address, and current home and/or cellular telephone number of the COP and 
of an alternate designated employee. The Recipient shall be responsible for ensuring that the information 
on file in the USAID Pakistan EXO/SSO is up-to-date so that in an emergency, the COP or alternate 
representative can be reached immediately and he/she can rapidly contact all other affected employees. 

 

The Recipient will be requested to notify the AOR and EXO/SSO about any changes of the individual 
listed in the security plan as in charge of security. 

 

Once the Agreement is awarded, the Recipient shall be required to submit a list of all personnel involved 
in the implementation of the project, including sub awardees’ personnel. The required list shall be 
submitted to the AOR and EXO/SSO no later than 30 days after the effective date of the Agreement and 
must be updated every quarter after the start date of the agreement and/or if a change of personnel 
happens. 

b) Security Plan 


 

The Recipient shall develop a security plan to safeguard all project operations and to comply with all 
United States Government regulations and Pakistani law. The plan is to be implemented and maintained 
also by all subcontractors (and/or sub-grantees). The security plan will be reviewed by the Agreement 
Officer in consultation with USAID/Pakistan’s EXO/SSO. 

 

The plan shall include: 

 

● Procedures for reporting and addressing security threats 
● Procedures for reporting any deaths related to the project 
● Procedures for reporting and addressing any persons missing or kidnapping incidents 
● Name and contact information of security contact person for the head office and 
regional office(s) 
● An internal “cascade” list for communicating with staff, which shall be updated/, 
maintained by the Recipient. The Recipient shall provide the name, address and 
telephone numbers of the COP and their designee to USAID as principle contacts in 
case of security situations/emergencies. The Recipient shall be responsible for 
passing information to their staff. 


 

c) Life Support and Security Services 


 

The Recipient shall be responsible for maintaining the security of its personnel, materials and equipment. 
All employees of the Recipient must meet the requirements of their work-site, which may include, but not 
limited to background checks, security/restricted area clearances, drug-free workplace, safety training 
and/or any other company safety and security requirements. 

 

d) Security Threat Reporting 


 


As part of the overall security requirements, the Recipient shall report any security threats and/or 
incidents verbally / by telephone, immediately to the following USAID/Pakistan representatives: 

 

● Security & Safety Specialist and any other USAID/Pakistan EXO designated official(s) 
● Executive Officer (EXO) 
● AOR 


 

Subsequently, a written report shall be submitted in accordance with approved procedures. The Recipient 
shall develop a list of specific steps to track any potential/identified threats, which will be part of its 
overall security system. All subcontractors will be required by the Recipient to report any 
threats/incidents to the Recipient, who will immediately after, notify the above listed USAID/Pakistan 
representatives. 

 

USAID requires appropriate Security reports be submitted to the Islamabad Safety & Security Specialist, 
Executive Office, AOR and other USAID/Pakistan officials as directed by USAID Executive Office. The 
type and frequency of these reports may vary with the project scope, location, and criticality. The 
Recipient shall report an Initial Threat Assessments and subsequent changes as often as the situation 
requires (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly etc.). The Recipient is also required to notify USAID of any 
security related incident in a timely manner according to the following guidelines: 

 

There are various types of Incident Reporting: Serious Incident Report (SIR); Incident Report (IR); 
Situation Report (SITREP); and any other security related report that may be required by USAID. 

 

Serious Incident Report (SIR) 

 

● An incident that involves the death, injury, kidnapping of partner personnel and/or damage 
to partner’s property. 
● An incident that has critically damaged the funded program, such as fire, catastrophic flood, 
etc. 
● Initial SIR must be reported verbally immediately, and within 4 hours of the incident 
occurrence/discovered 
● A Complete SIR must be filed in writing within 24 hours of the incident 
● Updated SIR will continue to be filed in a timely basis (daily, weekly) as long as the 
situation exists. The time line will be adjusted as required by USAID. 
● Final Report SIR will summarize the incident, the subsequent happenings and the final 
resolution. 


 

Incident Report (IR) 

 

● An incident involving accidents, potential harm, suspicious persons or acts, threats or 
harassing actions against personnel or the program. 
● IR should be filed as soon as possible (within 24 hours) after the incident is evaluated, and a 
complete report not later than 72 hours after the incident. 


 

Situation Report (SITREP) 

 

● A report that a significant, but not critical action or activity, has taken place that has 
impacted, or may impact, on the wellbeing of the personnel or the success of the program. 
● This report may describe trends, second hand information that may have bearing on the 
project, or impact on future operations. 



 

Telephonic communication is the preferred method to provide the initial information of an incident. A 
written report by e-mail must follow as soon as possible within above described guidelines and it shall be 
as detailed as possible. The report shall follow the format approved in the original Security Plan but at a 
minimum it shall contain the name of the company, name of the victim(s), date, time, a description of 
what happened, where the incident occurred, and any other relevant details surrounding the incident. If 
this is an ongoing incident, progress reports should be submitted in accordance with the guidelines 
provided in order to keep USAID-Islamabad Security personnel apprised of the situation. 

 

III. PAKINFO REPORTING REQUIREMENT 

 

USAID/Pakistan utilizes a management information system (MIS), currently called PakInfo, to track 
activities for all mission-funded projects at the national, provincial, district, and village levels. The 
purpose of this database is to map the location of project implementation sites to the nearest village or 
geospatial coordinates, monitor the use of funds at the district and tehsil level and the performance of 
projects to meet timely information requirements for USAID/Pakistan and several interested parties. 
These interested parties are USAID/Washington, Congress, implementing partners, the Government of 
Pakistan (GOP), other donors, and stakeholders. This reporting process supports the bilateral agreement 
between the U.S. Government and GOP by sharing information on USAID/Pakistan’s Mission-funded 
activities. The Recipient shall provide a quarterly update of information (including, but not limited to, 
performance results, geospatial coordinates, and photographs) on the activities under the acquisition or 
assistance agreement by entering this information into the USAID/Pakistan's MIS. The Recipient shall 
enter information via an Internet website or a Microsoft (MS) Access Database; USAID will provide the 
URL address or Access Database, and a user ID/password. A comprehensive user manual will be 
provided by USAID/Pakistan. Upon receipt of the manual, the Recipient will enter and manage the data 
accordingly. 

 

IV. AMMONIUM NITRATE AND CALCIUM AMMONIUM NITRATE RESTRICTION 

(September 2011) (Class Deviation OAA-DEV-11-03c, expiration date September 8, 2016) 

 

(a) Ammonium Nitrate (AN) and Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (CAN) are marketed and used as 
fertilizers for agricultural applications, and as explosives for construction/demolition applications. 
None of the funds made available under this contract/agreement shall be used, directly or 
indirectly, to produce, acquire, use, transport, store, sell, or otherwise deal with AN for 
agricultural applications or CAN for agricultural or construction/demolition applications. This 
clause/provision supersedes the terms and conditions of any other clause/provision, including any 
deemed approval, in this contract/agreement applicable to restricted goods and services. This 
clause/provision shall not be altered or its applicability waived. 


 

(b) If USAID determines that the contractor/recipient or any subcontractor/subawardee has used any 
funds under this contract/agreement contrary to the restriction in paragraph (a) of this 
clause/provision, the Contracting Officer/Agreement Officer may require the contractor/recipient 
to refund the entire amount used for such purposes. 


 

(c) The contractor/recipient shall insert this clause/provision in its entirety in all 
subcontracts/subawards, including (without limitation) Grants under Contracts (GUCs). 


 

V. ANTI-FRAUD HOTLINE 

 


a) The Recipient is required to include the following language on its website(s), and in any solicitations, 
procurements and recruitments: 


 

“USAID/Pakistan has, in cooperation with the USAID Office of Inspector General, established the Anti- 
Fraud Hotline to provide an avenue for the reporting of fraud, waste, and abuse which may be associated 
with USAID funded projects in Pakistan. Complaints are handled with complete confidentiality 
and individuals are encouraged to report when corruption, fraud, waste or abuse may exist in the 
USAID/Pakistan projects. Reports can be filed anonymously via the easy-to-use Hotline (toll free 
number 0800 84700); e-mail at complaints@anti-fraudhotline.com; fax at 021-35390410; postal address 
at 5-C, 2nd Floor Khayban-e-Ittehad, Phase VII, DHA, Karachi, Pakistan; and on the website www.antifraudhotline.
com. ” 

 

b) Fraud awareness materials (in all regional languages) are available at www.anti-fraudhotline.com, 
and the Contractor/Grantee/Recipient must use reasonable efforts to ensure that USAID/Pakistan’s 
sub awardees are provided these materials. 


 

c) The Recipient must prominently post notice(s) of USAID/Pakistan’s Anti-Fraud Hotline within 
public areas of its project’s offices and implementation areas in the appropriate local languages 
(unless USAID agrees to the contrary in special circumstances i.e. security threats or law and order 
issues). Copies of the posters are available at Anti-Fraud Hotline office and can be requested by 
contacting the hotline number or emailing them at complaints@anti-fraudhotline.com. 


 

VI. PARTNER VETTING 

 

Prior to award, the highest rated applicants will be notified to fulfill vetting requirements. 

 

(a) The recipient must comply with the vetting requirements for key individuals under this award. 

 

(b) Definitions: As used in this provision, “key individual,” “key personnel,” and “vetting official” have 
the meaning contained in 22 CFR 701.1. 

 

(c) The Recipient must submit within 15 days a USAID Partner Information Form, USAID Form 500-13, 
to the vetting official identified below when the Recipient replaces key individuals with individuals who 
have not been previously vetted for this award. Note: USAID will not approve any key personnel who 
are not eligible for approval after vetting. The designated vetting official is: 

 

Vetting official: Chad Johnson 

 

Address: USAID/Pakistan, U.S. Embassy Islamabad, Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5 

Islamabad, Pakistan 44000 

 

Email: pakaidvsu@usaid.gov (for inquiries only) 

 

(d)(1) The vetting official will notify the Recipient that it— 

 

(i) Is eligible based on the vetting results, 

(ii) Is ineligible based on the vetting results, or 

(iii) Must provide additional information, and resubmit the USAID Partner Information Form with the 
additional information within the number of days the vetting official specifies. 

 


(2) The vetting official will include information that USAID determines releasable. USAID will 
determine what information may be released consistent with applicable law and Executive Orders, and 
with the concurrence of relevant agencies. 

 

(e) The inability to be deemed eligible as described in this award term may be determined to be a material 
failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the award and may subject the recipient to suspension 
or termination as specified in the subpart “Remedies for Noncompliance” at 2 CFR part 200. 

 

(f) Reconsideration: (1) Within 7 calendar days after the date of the vetting official's notification, the 
recipient or prospective subrecipient or contractor that has not passed vetting may request in writing to the 
vetting official that the Agency reconsider the vetting determination. The request should include any 
written explanation, legal documentation and any other relevant written material for reconsideration. 

(2) Within 7 calendar days after the vetting official receives the request for reconsideration, the Agency 
will determine whether the recipient's additional information merits a revised decision. 

 

(3) The Agency's determination of whether reconsideration is warranted is final. 

 

(g) A notification that the Recipient has passed vetting does not constitute any other approval under this 
award. 

 

Alternate I. When sub-recipients will be subject to vetting, add the following paragraphs to the basic 
award term: 

 

(h) When the prime recipient anticipates that it will require prior approval for a subaward in accordance 
with 2 CFR 200.308(c)(6) the subaward is subject to vetting. The prospective subrecipient must submit a 
USAID Partner Information Form, USAID Form 500-13, to the vetting official identified in paragraph (c) 
of this provision. The agreement officer must not approve a subaward to any organization that has not 
passed vetting when required. 

 

(i) The recipient agrees to incorporate the substance of paragraphs (a) through (i) of this award term in all 
first tier subawards under this award. 

 

Alternate II. When specific classes of services are subject to vetting, add the following paragraph: 

 

(j) Prospective contractors at any tier providing the following classes of services must pass vetting. 
Recipients must not procure these services until they receive confirmation from the vetting official that 
the prospective contractor has passed vetting. 

 

(End of Provision) 

 

VII. POST AWARD CONDITION PRECEDENT TO START PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
IN PAKISTAN: 

 

A condition precedent to start project implementation will be that the apparent successful applicant must 
have, within 90 days of the award date, (i) obtained registration(s) with any relevant agency of the 
Government of Pakistan (GOP), (ii) obtained any necessary No-Objection Certificate(s) (NOCs) from the 
Ministry of Interior or other relevant GOP and/or Provincial Agency, and (iii) entered into any necessary 
Memoranda of Understanding with the relevant governmental body. Should the organization be 
unsuccessful in satisfying the condition precedent within 90 days, the award may be terminated at the 
discretion of the Agreement Officer and issued to the next highest rated applicant. 


 

The apparent successful applicant will be asked to submit a “Pre-Mobilization Plan and Budget” to 
include a statement of understanding of GOP and Provincial requirements to implement the project in 
Pakistan, and the minimum staff and resources needed for obtaining these requirements. 

 

VIII. PROHIBITION ON PROVIDING FEDERAL ASSISTANCE TO ENTITIES THAT 
REQUIRE CERTAIN INTERNAL CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENTS – 
REPRESENTATION (APRIL 2015) 

 

(a) In accordance with section 743 of Division E, Title VII, of the Consolidated and further 
Continuing Resolution Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235), Government agencies are not 
permitted to use funds appropriated (or otherwise made available) under that or any other Act for 
providing federal assistance to an entity that requires employees, sub awardees or contractors of 
such entity seeking to report fraud, waste, or abuse to sign internal confidentiality agreements or 
statements prohibiting or otherwise restricting such employees, sub awardees, or contractors from 
lawfully reporting such waste, fraud, or abuse to a designated investigative or law enforcement 
representative of a Federal department or agency authorized to receive such information. 


 

(b) The prohibition in paragraph (a) of this provision does not contravene requirements applicable to 
Standard Form 312, Form 4414, or any other form issued by a Federal department or agency 
governing the non disclosure of classified information. 


 

(c) By submission of its application, the prospective recipient represents that it does not require 
employees, sub awardees, or contractors of such entity seeking to report fraud, waste, or abuse to 
sign internal confidentiality agreements or statements prohibiting or otherwise restricting such 
employees, sub awardees, or contractors from lawfully reporting such waste, fraud, or abuse to a 
designated investigative or law enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency 
authorized to receive such information. 


 

(END OF PROVISION) 

 

 

END OF SECTION F 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

 

Any prospective applicant desiring an explanation or interpretation of this NOFO must request it in 
writing by the deadline for questions specified in the cover letter to allow a reply to reach all 
prospective applicants before the submission of their applications. Any information given to a 
prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective 
applicants as an amendment of this NFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications 
or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicants. 

 

Any questions or comments concerning this NOFO must be submitted in writing by email to Ms. 
Maria Hassan at mahassan@usaid.gov by the deadline for questions indicated at the top of this 
NOFO’s cover letter. 

 

 

END OF SECTION G 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement Officer is 
the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. Any 
award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of funds and continued 
relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used by the 
U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or 
in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award is made as a 
result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government will have the right 
to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This restriction 
does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained 
from another source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets 
{insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the Applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 
application.” 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 
and https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory 
Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award will also contain the 
following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. NONGOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PREDETERMINED (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL 
(Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL 
(Profit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA4. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT TRAINING 
(JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA5. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES – 
SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA6. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH 
SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 

 

 

RAA7. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

 

 

RAA8. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY (COOPERATING 
COUNTRY TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

 

 

RAA9. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA10. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

 

 

RAA11. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

 

RAA12. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 
2014) 

 

 

RAA13. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA14. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 




 

 

RAA15. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA16. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR ADVOCACY OF 
THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA17. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 
2004) 

 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED 
IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

 

 

RAA23. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA24. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA25. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

 

 

RAA26. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA28. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE 
(MAY 2017) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not 
Required 

 

Standard Provision 




TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 
2014) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

TBD 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST 
RATE AGREEMENT (NICRA) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA5. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

 

 

RAA6. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA7. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA8. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR 
TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA9. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA10. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA11. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA12. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

 

 

RAA 14. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA15. PROGRAM INCOME (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA16. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA17. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA18. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS 
(JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 




 

 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTITRAFFICKING 
FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 

 

 

RAA22. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES 
– SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA23. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA24. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA25. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA26. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL 
ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS 
(April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH 
ASSISTANCE (MAY 2017) 



 

 

 


 

Annex II- Summary Budget Template 

 

 

Line Items 

Total 

Salaries and Allowances 

$ 

Fringe benefits 

$ 

Travel & Transportation 

$ 

Equipment & Supplies 

$ 

Other Direct Cost 

$ 

Sub-awards 

$ 

Indirect Cost 

$ 

Total 

$ 



 

 


Annex III- USAID/Pakistan’s 2018 Gender Analysis 

 

Please see a separate attachment 

 

 

End of Section H 

 

End of NOFO 


