 

 

 

 

Issue Date: 05/23/2022 

 

Deadline for Questions/Clarifications: 06/06/2022 (17:00 Hours Honduras Time) 


Closing Date: 07/23/2022 

 

Closing Time: 17:00 Hours Honduras Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO); Number: 72052222RFA00005 

 

Program Title: Improving Pathways to Education (IPE) 

 

Federal Assistance Listing Number: 98.001 

 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement a new activity “Improving Pathways to 
Education (IPE)” program. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly 
to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check the 
website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity and 
to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. USAID bears no 
responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. If you have difficulty 
registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-
800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.6.f. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to 
all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

 

 

 


Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part of 
the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or 
submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the 
applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

Nathan Olah 

Supervisory Agreement Officer 

USAID/Honduras 

 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 





Section A – Program Description 4 



Section B – Federal Award Information 22 



Section C – Eligibility Information 24 



Section D – Application and Submission Information 26 



Section E – Application Review Information 48 



Section F – Federal Award Administration Information 52 



Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 63 



Section H – Other Information 64 










SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

SECTION A: Program Description - Improving Pathways to Education (IPE) 

 

A.1 Introduction 

 

USAID/Honduras’s goal for its 2020-2025 Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS)1 is 
“A more prosperous, democratic, and secure Honduras where citizens, especially youth, are 
inspired to stay and invest in their future.” The Improving Pathways to Education (IPE) Activity 
described in this program description (PD) will contribute to achieving this goal by increasing access 
to safe, quality basic education for children and youth, particularly those in areas of high out-
migration. This PD provides background, scope, purpose, and top-level objectives of this award. 

1 USAID/Honduras’s 2020-2025 CDCS can be found at https://www.usaid.gov/honduras/cdcs 

 

A.2 Summary 

 

The IPE Activity will increase access to safe, quality basic education for children and youth by 
improving socio-economic opportunities, contributing to the multi-sectoral impacts of violence 
prevention efforts, and decreasing irregular migration. This will be achieved through evidence-
informed interventions under three results. 

1. Enhanced Governance for Effectiveness, Transparency, and Responsiveness in the 
Education System 
2. Increased Access to and Retention in Inclusive, Quality Education, Particularly for the 
most Marginalized Learners 
3. Improved Safety in and around Schools 


 

This PD describes the objectives and results to be achieved, but intentionally does not state how the 
work is to be accomplished. Potential applicants have flexibility to develop creative, cost-effective 
solutions, and the opportunity to propose innovative approaches to meet the stated objectives and 
results. Based on this PD, applicants will submit a technical approach which describes a strategy to 
achieve the results of the Activity. The technical approach must enable USAID/Honduras to assess 
the performance of the work against specific, clear, and measurable results (i.e., in terms of quality, 
quantity, timeliness, etc.), and show the method of assessing applicant performance against the 
required results. It is difficult to anticipate how USAID’s programmatic requirements will evolve 
over the life of this award due to rapid changes that Honduras faces such as political and financial 
instability, and emerging shocks and stresses, ranging from natural disasters to pandemics such as 
COVID-19. These emerging challenges negatively impact education priorities and 
USAID/Honduras’s ability to operate safely and effectively. As such, the Activity must be able to 
rapidly incorporate changes. In addition, technical interventions will evolve during the life of 


performance and the Activity must continuously seek ways to incorporate feasible, innovative, and 
evidence-based approaches in support of this program’s purpose and objectives. 

 

A.3 Purpose 

 

The purpose of the IPE Activity is to increase access to safe learning environments, and to relevant, 
and quality basic education for children and youth, particularly the most marginalized in communities 
with high violence and outmigration targeted by USAID. Increased education access, ensuring safe 
learning spaces, and improved quality in service provision will result in more citizens (stakeholders, 
families, and youth) committed to education as a means for productive and fulfilling lives in 
Honduras, thus contributing to higher level Mission objectives of decreasing irregular migration and 
preventing violence. Through both monitoring and evaluation, this activity also aims to add to the 
emergent evidence base on the link between education and violence prevention and mitigation. The 
target population will be at least 300,000 children and youth from 11 to 17 years (grades 6-9) 
inclusive of at-risk and out-of -school children and youth. This age group is at high risk for both 
victimization and perpetration of violence. This Activity aims to ensure all learners exit the basic 
primary education cycle with the necessary foundational skills in reading, math, and social emotional 
learning to continue their education and be resilient to pull factors leading to violence and irregular 
migration. The Activity will also address enrollment, repetition, transition, and completion of grades 
and levels of education. This Activity will approach the stated challenges from a systems perspective, 
working with stakeholders at national, regional, and local levels to evaluate the key blockages and 
enablers within the system to identify levers for addressing those blockages and reap the benefits of 
potential opportunities. One of those particular key blockages that will receive direct attention and 
metrics in this activity is violence in and around schools, which can lead to life-long negative 
behavior that impacts the whole Honduran society. Preventing that violence is critical to enabling at-
risk youth to stay in school, contributing to better academic outcomes, improved lives, reduced crime, 
and stronger communities. 

A.4. Deliveries or Performance 

 

The IPE Activity will be implemented over a five-year period in selected municipalities and 
communities across Honduras characterized by high levels of out-migration and insecurity. As 
appropriate and to the extent possible in accordance with the achievement of the objectives of the 
Activity, the implementer will focus its interventions in key zones of influence identified by the 
Mission. Specific community and school selection within the area of influence will be done 
collaboratively with the Applicant with the final approval resting with USAID/Honduras. The 
Activity will be expected to closely coordinate with other relevant USAID activities where co-
location and coordination will assist in the achievement of higher-level Mission objectives. It will be 
particularly important, for example, to develop strategic linkages to the Mission's violence prevention 
activity, Sembrando Esperanza. This could include exploring ways in which successful violence 
prevention interventions in schools can be leveraged in support of broader violence prevention efforts 
in the community. Sembrando´s work towards supporting violence prevention in the community also 
could be leveraged to help improve children’s safe access to and from schools. 

 


A.5 Background 

 

Public education in Honduras is characterized by low enrollment rates, high dropouts and repetition 
rates, low achievement scores, insufficient alternative education opportunities, low graduation rates, 
and a highly politicized, underfunded and ineffective system. National end of grade test results (2019) 
show that approximately 30 percent of students achieve proficiency in reading and only 10 percent in 
mathematics at the end of primary education. With the assistance of USAID and other donors, there 
was some progress particularly in the first 15 years of the current century. However, in the last few 
years with the reduction of resources assigned to education, dropping from 7.2 percent of the GNP in 
2012 to 4.9 percent in 2020, academic achievement has stagnated, and enrollment rates have 
decreased, particularly in the upper grades of primary education and in secondary education. 

 

Schools and communities face several contextual challenges that affect students’ ability to attend 
school and learn. Poverty levels in Honduras remain high; more than 60 percent of households in the 
country live in poverty and more than 40 percent in extreme poverty. This fact makes it very difficult 
for parents to send and keep their children in school. Grades six and nine in particular see high levels 
of drop out. Parents also struggle to see the value of education as it is often not viewed as relevant to 
the needs of the marketplace. Widespread insecurity and threats of violence in the home, schools, and 
communities intimidate students and teachers alike, affecting access to education and learning. A 
recent study by the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) found that half of all children living in 
neighborhoods where criminal gangs are present are out-of-school or are forced to drop out.2 

2 Consejo Noruego Para Refugiados (2019) Centroamérica: Una generación fuera de la 
Escuela.https://nrc.org.co/2019/05/13/centroamerica-una-generacion-fuera-de-la-escuela/ 

 

 

The limited and precarious conditions of school facilities, including overcrowded classrooms, 
shortage of basic learning materials, and lack of electricity and water, also compromise the quality of 
education. These conditions are exacerbated by repeated environmental shocks such as floods, 
droughts, and hurricanes. 

 

Pandemic-related school closures have resulted in additional drop-outs reducing recent gains in 
enrollment and retention numbers. Recent data from the National Institute of Statistics indicates that 
roughly 2 million children and youth are not currently enrolled in the system (almost 50 percent of 
the school-age population). According to a recent study from the World Bank, the proportion of 
students under the minimum sufficiency level will increase from 55 to 71 percent in the LAC region. 
Preliminary data from the Ministry of Education (MOE) indicates that in 2021, approximately 31 
percent fewer students in Honduras achieved the reading proficiency for second grade, compared to a 
similar assessment administered in 2017. 

 

COVID-19 has forced local and national education officials into new territory as they struggle to 
maintain continuity of learning. Pandemic-related school closures have forced many students into 
distance learning options that neither the MOE or communities are equipped to support. The MOE 
does not have an adequate technological platform and curriculum to support this large-scale access to 
online learning. Only 40 percent of households in the country have access to the internet, and in many 
instances, where access is available, parents are not able to afford that access. As a result, 76 percent 


of learners in public schools are only attending a maximum of five hours of online classes per week. 
This has also resulted in the drop-out of more than 100,000 students in the current 2021 school year 
as compared to the previous year. The value of education has also diminished as 52 percent of parents 
who have kept their children in school report low levels of learning. According to some civil society 
and other actors, including academic institutions, returning to a blended learning model is the only 
option to guarantee education to 80 percent of children and young people in the public school system. 

 

Honduras, including its education system, is also dealing with core challenges related to management 
and governance. In 2020, Honduras ranked 157 out of 180 countries worldwide on Transparency 
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index. Corruption and a lack of transparency in the system 
have a significant impact, siphoning the limited and much needed resources away from schools, 
affecting the hiring and professional development of teachers, administrators, and other education 
staff, investment in school infrastructure, and the procurement of key goods and services. 
Additionally, there is a lack of commitment to the decentralization process and the sharing of roles 
and responsibilities among the central government and other actors, including the local government, 
private sector and local communities, contributing to an over-centralized system that struggles to 
meet the unique needs of communities. 

 

Emergent evidence indicates that interventions to improve education access and quality, when 
delivered in collaboration with other multi-sectoral activities, can contribute to decreased irregular 
migration and violence prevention. According to the previous Development Objective (DO) 1 
Victimization and Security Survey (2020), among respondents with some education, willingness to 
migrate irregularly declines after primary school is complete. Similarly, among workforce 
development participants (ages 16-29) in USAID/ Honduras’s previous Workforce Development 
Activity, beneficiaries’ intent to migrate to the U.S. is highest among those students who have not 
completed 9th grade. Forty-seven percent of Honduran parents surveyed in opinion surveys stated 
that education would be their main reason for sending their children to another country. Moreover, 
quality education can incentivize enrollment in school and encourage families to remain in the 
country. However, it’s incredibly important that education initiatives work in partnership across 
sectors to holistically address the complex causes of irregular migration, including violence. Youth, 
in particular, are at a great risk of engaging in and being victims of violence. Although a systematic 
evidence review revealed more research is needed to establish rigorous causal pathways between 
education interventions and violence prevention, the review identified several education interventions 
linked with decreases in violence and crime with emergent or moderate evidence bases. These 
interventions are often core to basic education programs and include school-wide positive behavioral 
interventions and supports, dropout prevention programs, classroom management, school-related 
gender based violence programs, parenting classes, and cash transfers.3 Over the last CDCS period, 
USAID/Honduras has learned about the importance of protective factors including the acquisition of 
foundational and targeted academic and social and emotional skills, as well as staying in school, in 
decreasing the risks of not only engaging in violence and delinquent behavior, but also irregular 
migration. 

3 Evidence review: The effect of education programs on violence, crime, and related outcomes, Bagby et. al. 2021. 
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XGXS.pdf 

 

 


A.6 Performance Objectives and Expected Results 

 

The overall goal of the IPE Activity is to increase access to safe, relevant, and quality basic education 
for at least 300,000 children and youth in Honduras, particularly students living in areas with high 
rates of violence and irregular migration. This Activity will aim to ensure that students progress 
through the higher grades of basic education, allowing them to continue their secondary acquisition 
with strong foundational skills in reading, math, and Social and Emotional Learning (SEL). In turn, 
those children and youth will have the knowledge, skills, and motivation to engage as productive 
citizens in Honduras, thus reducing students’ vulnerability to participating in violent or illicit 
activities and migrating irregularly. The results, intermediate results, expected outcomes, and 
illustrative indicators are included below. In addition to the USAID standard and supplemental 
indicators, the applicant shall include proposed indicators to measure progress towards the activity 
level outcomes of violence prevention and decreased irregular migration. To the extent possible, all 
indicators should be disaggregated by age, gender, and other demographic factors that would allow 
further analysis to measure effectiveness of addressing marginalization. 

 

To achieve this, IPE shall concentrate on the following three results: 

 

Result 1: Enhanced Governance of the Education System for Effectiveness, Transparency, and 
Responsiveness. 

 

● IR 1.1 Strengthened evidence-informed decision management processes. 
● IR 1.2 Strengthened transparency, participation and decentralization in education 
management. 
● IR 1.3 Strengthened capacity of the education system to respond to and recover from shocks 
and stressors. 


The goal of this result is to support the MOE and other entities relevant to the education sector to 
become responsive, transparent, and effective institutions able to provide and oversee quality 
education for all. This component seeks to identify strengths, gaps, and areas of improvement within 
the education system in a systematic and collaborative approach and then propose viable short and 
long-term solutions to address these challenges in a sustainable manner. The Activity shall take a 
systems change approach4 to address the core challenges in education governance and management, 
identifying the key system changes that are required as well as potential levers for bringing systems-
level change. 

4 USAID/Honduras will facilitate change through a systems change approach, which the Mission defines as “the use of a 
collection of approaches and principles to achieve long-term, sustainable change through development programming, 
which realizes fundamental changes in how interdependent parts of a system—roles, rules, relationships, resources and 
results—across sectors, actors, populations, and geographies, are configured and interact.” The Mission chose to take a 
systems change approach because, while the Mission achieved results as intended over the previous CDCS, its success 
was limited to target geographies and populations and was highly dependent on USAID’s ability to invest against the 
problems being confronted. The Mission recognizes a need to catalyze local systems-led development if sustainable 
outcomes are to be achieved. Across the country, violence continues to affect large segments of the population, 
corruption is still endemic, and the majority of people in western Honduras still live in poverty. The Mission has learned 
that to achieve broad, sustainable change in Honduras, patterns need to be broken; the systems themselves which produce 
these states need to change. 

 

One key blockage is related to the culture of assessments and learning. Among other potential 
interventions, the IPE Activity will aim to strengthen the culture of assessments for learning, data 


collection and use, and national and local education management information systems. The Activity 
will collaborate with the MOE and other stakeholders to increase transparency of critical decisions 
such as resource management and allocation and teacher hiring and placement to ensure schools are 
adequately staffed and equipped. Interventions under this result will also support decentralization 
efforts at all levels within the education system, prioritizing local management and control and 
providing opportunities for citizen participation in decision-making related to education. Finally, the 
Activity will also work with the MOE to build capacity within the education system to respond to and 
recover from shocks and stressors - including endemic violence - by investing in the resilience of the 
education sector. Some illustrative activities include: 

 

● Support the implementation of the testing system, collection of student learning data and 
education system management data, and use of its results to improve education quality 
● Expand the Early Warning and Response System to monitor enrollment, identify and address 
potential drop-out risks utilizing youth input and leadership where appropriate, and facilitate 
the re-enrollment of children and youth that are returned migrants as well as at-risk youth in 
high violence areas 
● Strengthen MOE’s internal controls with administrative and clerical support of core 
operations, technical expertise, and strategic planning 
● Support MOE and other stakeholders in strengthening transparency and accountability in the 
hiring and allocation of teachers 
● Support MOE’s and other key stakeholders’ crisis and disaster preparedness, planning and 
response at the national, local and school levels 
● Strengthen local education offices and coordination with municipalities and school networks 
● Strengthen the engagement of citizens, civil society organizations, private sector actors and 
others in improving the transparency, accountability and effectiveness of the educational 
system 
● Build capacity of local actors supporting the education sector with a special focus on 
strengthening the technical and organizational capacity of civil society organizations focused 
on youth, education, and violence prevention (Note that such interventions would be closely 
linked to Result 1) 
● Formation of an intergovernmental steering committee to respond to and address violence 
with representatives from both the security, youth and education sectors. 


 

Note that the above are illustrative activities. Applicants are encouraged to identify the specific 
systems-level changes they will address along with potential interventions to support those changes 
and indicators to better measure impact. 

 

The Applicant will include the following standard indicators and will propose additional indicators to 
measure both outputs and outcomes under Objective 1. The final list of indicators will be defined in 
the Activity’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan. 

 

● Supp-16: Education system strengthened through USG assistance 
● ES.1-12: Number of education administrators and officials who complete professional 
development activities with USG assistance 
● ES. 1-13 Number of parent teacher associations (PTAs) or community governance structures 
engaged in primary or secondary education supported with USG assistance 
● 


 


Expected Outcomes under Result 1: 

 

● The MOE, at the central and local level, is able to collect, apply, socialize, and carry out 
monitoring and data control on key outcomes of interest such as enrollment, retention, 
academic achievement and transition rates. 
● The authority of the MOE at the local level is decentralized, helping to increase transparent, 
responsive and accountable management, and better coordination with municipalities and 
regional offices. 
● The MOE and key stakeholders of the education sector at the national, local, and school 
community level have increased ability to plan for, respond to, and recover from shocks and 
stressors such as hurricanes, pandemics, school closures, etc. 
● There is an improvement in citizen perception of transparency, accountability, and 
effectiveness of the educational system. 
● There is increased engagement of citizens and civil society organizations in education 
decision-making. 
● Improved inclusion of, coordination with, and capacity development of local actors who have 
experience reaching marginalized groups including at-risk youth. 


 

Result 2: Increased Access to And Retention in Inclusive, Quality Education, Particularly for 
the most Marginalized Learners. 

 

● IR 2.1 Barriers to access reduced, particularly for the most marginalized learners 
● IR 2.2 Expanded and strengthened alternative education modalities that provide credible 
pathways to formal education or completion 
● IR 2.3 Increased retention and promotion rates for learners in grades 6-9 
● IR 2.4 Improved learning outcomes in reading and math and social and emotional skills 
● IR 2.5 Teachers use of evidence-based, instructional practices in reading, math, and SEL 
increased 
● IR 2.6 Families and caregivers value education and have the resources and knowledge needed 
to ensure their children stay in school 


 

The IPE Activity will work with education stakeholders to reduce the barriers to access education 
which prevent children and youth from completing basic education and enrolling in secondary 
education. The Activity will aim to increase retention and promotion rates for students in grades 6-9, 
and it will expand and strengthen alternative education modalities, including flexible modalities, to 
provide credible pathways to continuing formal education or completion. Existing alternative 
education modalities may need to be modified, expanded or strengthened, or new alternative 
modalities created, to meet the needs of learners, particularly those outside of the education system. 
Special attention will be given to targeting youth at risk of violence and youth in conflict with the 
law, identifying appropriate alternative education approaches for these groups and strategically 
aligning SEL skills and training to target these often-marginalized populations. Through a focus on 
integrating social and emotional learning into classroom instruction and soft skill development into 
non-formal education modalities, the Activity will aim to build skills, such as affective empathy. 
Current evidence suggests a link between affective empathy and violence prevention outcomes in 


youth.5 SEL interventions should build on previous successful interventions and evidence including 
recent work from the region by Innovations for Poverty Action.6 The Activity will address learning 
loss and access challenges presented by the pandemic and will ensure that learners participating in 
non-formal education modalities will develop the necessary reading, math and soft skills. 
Additionally, under this objective, IPE will improve learning outcomes in reading and math and 
social and emotional skills with an emphasis on the use of grounded, evidence-based, responsive 
instructional practices in the classroom. This objective is critical given pandemic-related decreases in 
enrollment. While in-person schooling remains interrupted or not fully available, it's imperative that 
students have a distance learning option that works for them and maintains continuity of learning. 
Once the schools reopen, they will have to make significant efforts to enroll out-of -school children 
and youth, re-enroll students who lost touch with the education system, and address the critical 
learning gaps caused by the pandemic, including those related to domestic or communal violence. A 
critical aspect of the return to learning will be helping families and caregivers identify and access the 
necessary resources to support the education of their children as well as support families in promoting 
lifelong learning for their children. 

5 https://www.youthpower.org/sites/default/files/YouthPower/resources/Key%20Soft%20Skills%20for%20Cross-
Sectoral%20Youth%20Outcomes_YouthPower%20Action.pdf 

6 Socioemotional Skills Development in Highly Violent Contexts: Measurements and Impacts. Diaz, Lelys et al. Jan 21, 
2022. 

 

 

Some illustrative activities include: 

 

● Support processes focused on the safe reopening of schools as outlined in the Plan de Retorno 
Seguro a Clases developed by the MOE with support from USAID, which includes helping 
schools implement school-based plans for a safe reopening, re-engagement plans for all 
learners including the most marginalized, adapting instructional time and curricula, 
adjustment of academic calendars, modifying exams and learner promotion plans 
● Design and implement formative assessments to address learning loss and inform classroom 
instruction decisions 
● Design and implement summative, end of year assessments to measure student learning 
● Expand accredited accelerated education options for completing education at the basic 
education level that are also responsive to the needs of over-age and returned migrant children 
and youth 
● Design and implement catch-up and remedial education methodology and programs at the 
central and local level 
● Implement SEL instruction designed to build resilience, social cohesion, and empathy or other 
SEL skills proven to advance target outcomes in education and violence prevention 
● Expansion or creation of multi-modal distance learning options that meet the needs of all 
learners, including those who have historically been excluded from the education system 
● Implementation of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles into education approaches 
to ensure inclusive learning opportunities for all students 
● Pilot and/or expand innovative programs such as conditional or unconditional cash transfers to 
address family resource gaps and increase enrollment and retention, taking into account the 
national experience on these kinds of programs 



 

Note that the above are illustrative activities. Applicants are encouraged to identify the specific 
systems-level changes related to Result 2 that they hope to address along with potential interventions 
to support those changes. 

 

The applicant will include the following indicators and will propose additional indicators to measure 
both outputs and outcomes under Result 2. The final list of indicators will be defined in the Activity’s 
MEL Plan. 

 

● Supp-9: Percent of learners with improved social and emotional skills, as locally defined, after 
participating in USG assisted program7 
● ES.1-2: Percent of learners targeted for USG assistance who attain minimum grade-level 
proficiency in reading at the end of primary school 
● Supp-3: Percent of learners attaining minimum grade-level proficiency in math at the end of 
primary school with USG assistance 
● Effective transition rate from primary to lower secondary education 
● Supp-10: Percent of teachers providing quality classroom instruction with USG support 


7 Successful applicants will work with USAID partner Supporting Holistic & Actionable Research in Education (SHARE) 
as relevant 

 

 

Expected Outcomes under Result 2: 

 

● Increased enrollment and transitions in the different levels of education, with a focus on 
transitions from 6th to 7th grade and up to 9th grade 
● Increased completion and graduation rates in target grades 
● Improved social and emotional skills and learning outcomes in reading and math in the target 
grades 
● Increased number of out-of-school children and youth completing alternative education 
programs 
● Increased number of vulnerable families in targeted communities decide to keep their children 
in school. 


 

Result 3: Improved Safety in and around Schools 

 

● IR 3.1 Improve education institutions´ and support structures’ ability to identify, reduce, and 
prevent threats to safety including violence in schools and communities through the creation 
of safe learning environments 
● IR 3.2 Increased protective factors among students and families 
● IR 3.3 Strengthen partnerships for increased participation, decision-making, and funding from 
the private sector and civil society for preventing or mitigating violence and improving 
education outcomes 


This objective will focus on addressing threats to safety, including violence. Addressing these threats 
is critical to improving learning outcomes and enabling at-risk youth to stay in school which can 
prevent victimization and perpetration of violence. To achieve this result, this Activity will work to 


establish safe learning environments8 by locally assessing internal and external threats, empowering 
local actors, and working with the community including actors beyond the education sector to 
improve access to safe, relevant education and prevent and/or mitigate violence in schools and 
communities. The Activity will reduce school-based violence including school related gender-based 
violence and increase resilience of children and youth. The Activity will use proven, evidence-
informed violence prevention methodologies to prevent youth from engaging in delinquent behavior, 
including specific interventions for children and youth at highest risk of drop-out or violence; such as 
secondary prevention services, after school activities, and integrated or standalone social and 
emotional learning. Activities under this result should build on the success of interventions under 
Asegurando La Educacion and other relevant activities by strengthening community engagement 
through Community School Committees and/or Municipal Councils of Education Development to 
support safety in schools and communities. The applicant should capitalize on USAID’s investment 
in and knowledge of safe learning environments and school-based violence prevention. 9 

8 Learning environment should be interpreted broadly and includes social (e.g. relationships with peers and adults), 
normative (e.g. attitudes, norms and beliefs), structural (e.g. policies), physical, and digital elements. 

9 Applicant should draw from, “Evidence review: The effect of education programs on violence, crime, and related 
outcomes” Bagby et al. 2021. https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XGXS.pdf 

10 Applicants should present an evidence-based intervention package drawing on the learning of Asegurando La 
Educacion and other relevant activities 

 

Finally, the Activity will strengthen partnerships for increased local participation, decision-making, 
and funding from the private sector and civil society for violence prevention in schools and 
communities to improve education outcomes such as learning, retention and completion. This last 
element will be closely linked with other Activity results, notably Result 1. Some illustrative 
activities include: 

 

● Create safe learning spaces free of violence to increase access, retention, and quality of 
education. This effort should capitalize on previous and current USAID investments such as 
Asegurando la Educacion, aiming to scale up proven methodologies to have a broader 
systems-level impact10 
● Establishing After-School Programs that are designed to foster relevant social and emotional 
skills like emotional regulation and impulse control and offer mentorship and individualized 
attention to students exhibiting risky behavior 
● Leverage support from the private sector to decrease crime and violence and improve 
educational outcomes, including scaling up remedial education programs 
● Engage local actors to deliver evidence-informed violence prevention methodologies to 
reduce risk of delinquency and increase youth resilience, capitalizing on USAID's investment 
● Support community engagement in school-based violence prevention through strengthened 
parent teacher associations, school community committees, and other mechanisms, with an 
eye to scaling successful interventions to have a systems-level impact 
● Ensure active referral pathways for students in need of specialized services, particularly 
students who experienced or perpetrated violence, partnering as relevant with Sembrando 
Esperanza and other USAID activities 
● Assist teachers and administrators to integrate locally tailored violence prevention techniques 
into teacher training and after school activities 



● Train educators on applying screening models to identify high-risk youth and to provide early 
intervention and additional support 
● Strategically link school-based violence prevention efforts with broader community efforts to 
prevent and mitigate violence 


 

Note that the above are illustrative activities. Applicants are encouraged to identify the specific 
systems-level changes related to Result 3 that they will address along with potential interventions to 
support those changes. 

 

The Applicant will include the following indicators and shall propose additional indicators to 
measure both outputs and outcomes under Result 3. The final list of indicators will be defined in the 
Activity’s MEL Plan. 

 

● Supp-7: Number of parents or community members trained to support children’s education 
with USG assistance 
● ES.1-51: Number of learning environments supported by USG assistance that have improved 
safety, according to locally-defined criteria (linked to CDCS sub IR 3.2.3). 
● Custom: Number of incidents of school violence and crime reduced 
● Custom: Number/percentage of youth with reduced risk factors that drive crime and violence 


 

Expected Outcomes under Result 3: 

 

● Children, youth, teachers, and other education stakeholders in target communities feel safe in 
their learning environment in schools and on route to schools. 
● Schools and their support structures are actively addressing and reducing threats to safety 
including school-based violence, cyber bullying, and school-related gender-based violence. 
● Improved linkages are established with the other Ministries, local governments, donors, and 
civil society, including private sector actors, resulting in additional resources and services to 
improve safety and reduction of violence in schools 
● Local organizations, parents and students value education and engage actively with others in 
planning and decision making around safety in schools 
● Improved linkages between violence prevention, education, and economic opportunities for 
youth, in coordination with other USAID activities 
● Improved collaboration among education, community, and security actors to mitigate and 
prevent violence in schools and communities. 


 

To achieve the results and objectives detailed above, the IPE Activity must actively seek and promote 
coordination and implementation with other USAID and donor activities and initiatives working 
towards improving the quality and reach of Honduras’s education system, including the reduction of 
violence. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Figure 1. IPE Activity - Theory of Change 

 

 

A.7 Adaptive, Flexible, and Collaborative Management 

 

USAID recognizes the importance of thinking critically and shifting strategic decisions to respond to 
emerging development challenges. The Activity should incorporate adaptive programming that is 
able to respond nimbly to emerging evidence, opportunities, and challenges. In particular, the 
Activity should be flexible to provide support for unanticipated needs and initiate support in new 
contexts or with new local partners as needs arise. While implementation plans will be annual, they 
should be viewed as living documents, and semi-annual review will be expected to ensure more 
adaptive and responsive programming. Structured Pause and Reflect discussions to revisit 
assumptions, review progress, and make course corrections, if necessary, will strengthen 
programmatic relevancy, promote sustainability, and help the Activity achieve the expected results. 
Maintaining this flexibility and adaptability to ensure responsiveness to evolving local and contextual 
dynamics, including pandemic-related health concerns, and to take advantage of opportunities and 
mitigate challenges is important for successful activity implementation. Interventions require an 
iterative, adaptive management approach that regularly reassesses and re-evaluates the operating 
environment(s) where the Activity works and adjusts program planning, implementation, and results 
measurement as necessary. Changes in the Activity implementation will also be affected by funds 
availability. 

 

USAID intends to award one Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding opportunity. 
Subject to funding availability, USAID intends to provide up to $80 million in total funding 
over a 5-year period. This $80 million consists of a base of $60 million and three program 
modifiers for a potential total of an additional $20 million. 

 

 


A.8 Program Modifiers 

 

USAID may employ program modifiers11 to respond to evolving programmatic opportunities that 
require a high degree of flexibility. Unforeseen opportunities or exigencies may entail implementing 
interventions in other programmatic spheres under the broad mantle of education programming. 
Program modifiers are subject to availability of funding and will be invoked at the discretion of 
USAID. As needed and as directed by the Agreement Officer, in consultation with the 
USAID/Honduras Agreement Officer’s Representative, the awardee must be able to present new 
areas of assistance programming related to the following program modifier categories. The “program 
modifier” cost line item will allow the release of separate, rapid response funds to the recipient and its 
partners for immediate activities to address emergencies or seize opportunities. 

11 For additional information on the use of Modifiers in awards, please see the following USAID Help Document: 
https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/shock_responsive_programming_guidance_compliant.pdf 

 

Subject to the availability of additional funding, USAID/Honduras may choose to invoke any of the 
following program modifiers to implement additional interventions at any point in the life of the 
Activity. The program modifiers have an additional total estimated budget of $20 million. The 
concepts for the program modifiers will be developed prior to the modification of the 
anticipated award. The expenditure of funds for a program modifier will be dependent on rapid 
review and approval of a Program Modifier Plan submitted by the Recipient once notified by 
USAID/Honduras during implementation. The Plan shall include a work plan for the modifier 
interventions, revised budget and budget narrative, an updated Program Description including 
staffing and organizational updates reflecting the new interventions (if applicable); and identify 
linkages with existing award implementation activities, as appropriate. 

 

A. Program Modifier 1. Improved Quality Education 

 

Efforts under this program modifier will support interventions under Result 2: Increased access to 
and retention in inclusive, quality education, particularly for the most marginalized learners. 
Interventions may include but are not limited to expansion to new geographic areas, new grades, 
increased or additional support for remedial, catch-up, or accelerated education including new or 
additional alternative education modalities, target support for marginalized populations including 
over-age and returned migrant children and youth learners, teacher training and support, and school 
or community level preparedness, planning and response to support continued access to quality 
learning opportunities. 

 

B. Program Modifier 2. Improved Safety in and around Schools 

 

Efforts under this program modifier will support interventions under Result 3: Improved safety in 
and around schools. This modifier is subject to the availability of additional CARSI funds. Outyear 
increases in CARSI allocation are contingent upon: A) comparable increases to the CARSI account 
overall, and B) that program results also justify increased use of CARSI. Possible programmatic 
interventions may include but aren’t limited to school and community safety and resilience analyses, 
advocacy for policy interventions to increase safety and reduction of crime both in schools and 
communities, support to parents and communities to enroll their children in school, outreach and 
advocacy with the private sector to reduce security-related barriers to youth employment, and 


a. Beneficiaries: This Activity will target learners between the ages of 11-17 years old, 
with a focus on children and youth at-risk of irregular migration, including returned 
migrants; children and youth at-risk of engaging in violence; and children and youth at 
risk of dropping out of school, inclusive of children and youth who are out of school. 
The Activity will also support the learners’ parents/caregivers. Additionally, it will 
enhance the capacity of the education community, including school officials, 
administrators, and teachers in target municipalities to deliver quality education 
services. 
b. Target Grade Levels: This Activity will focus on basic education in Honduras, with a 
particular focus on grades 6 through 9, when dropouts accelerate. Depending on 
available funding, there is the potential to employ a program modifier to work in 
additional grades, as needed to achieve the Activity goal and results to improve 
retention and completion within the education system. 
c. Coordination with USAID Activities: In alignment with the U.S. Government 
Strategy for International Basic Education, the Applicant should consider areas for 
potential coordination with other U.S. Government programs, including but not 
limited to relevant USAID activities in education and other sectors and the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture McGovern-Dole school feeding program. It is particularly 
important that the Applicant coordinate closely with USAID activities in areas such as 
youth workforce development, school-based violence prevention, nutrition, local 
governance and transparency and accountability. Coordination is critical for achieving 
the desired outcomes outlined in the theory of change. 
d. Coordination with Government of Honduras and other Donors: The Applicant 
should consider areas for collaboration and coordination with other donors working in 
Honduras, particularly donors working in areas such as migration, school-based 
violence, reading and math. The Applicant will also work closely with the MOE and 
other ministries, as well as relevant partner government agencies to achieve the results 
of this Activity, in support of the Government of Honduras’s strategic plans. The 
Applicant shall work closely with USAID to establish the best approach for 
partnership with the Government of Honduras. The Applicant is encouraged to 
develop a learning agenda to address policy issues that are a priority of the GOH. 
e. Mathematics Programming: The Activity should build on mathematics education 
interventions that have taken place to date in Honduras. Drawing on lessons learned 


increased engagement with targeted civil society organizations to improve community linkages to 
education. 

 

C. Program Modifier 3. Unforeseen Opportunities 

 

The purpose of this modifier is to enable USAID to respond to unforeseen opportunities that may 
arise to support an expanded geographic scope under IPE, or support the roll-out of a broader range 
of IPE education-related activities to achieve the Activity’s goal and results. In such an instance, 
USAID will work with the Recipient to integrate additional interventions, expand geographic focus, 
and/or expand program efforts. This program modifier may be exercised only at the discretion of the 
Agreement Officer and is contingent upon availability of funds. USAID reserves the right to fund any 
or none of the applications submitted by the Recipient. 

 

A.9 Operating Parameters 

 


from other donors, particularly the Japan International Cooperation Agency, the 
Applicant should develop an approach to strengthen mathematics education that builds 
on curriculum, training and materials that have been developed, drawing on lessons 
learned and best practices to ensure teachers have the necessary knowledge, skills, and 
materials to provide quality instruction and that classrooms are equipped with grade-
level appropriate materials to support mathematics instruction. The Activity should 
focus on developing, piloting and implementing teacher guides and student 
workbooks, as well as incorporating problem solving and critical thinking into 
classroom mathematics instruction. 
f. Reading Programming: The Activity should build on previous and current USAID 
investments to support early grade reading in Honduras. The reading approach should 
also incorporate best practices outlined in USAID’s Reading MATTERS Conceptual 
Framework.12 
g. Social Emotional Learning Programming: The Activity should build on previous 
and current USAID investments and approaches in social and emotional learning to 
provide contextually appropriate SEL to beneficiaries. The Activity will aim to 
integrate principles outlined in the USAID Social and Emotional Learning or Soft 
Skills Education Policy Brief to apply or adapt a contextually relevant and evidence-
based approach to support the development of social and emotional skills, or soft skills 
for youth learners in both formal and non-formal education. 
h. Private Sector Engagement: Private sector should be motivated to play a substantial 
role in strengthening the education system, reducing violence in schools and 
communities, and ensuring access to quality basic education in Honduras. The 
Applicant must present a plan for engaging the private sector in the education sector 
and encouraging investment in education. 
i. Supporting the most Marginalized Students: The Applicant must consider the 
barriers the most marginalized students face in accessing and completing a quality 
basic education. The Applicant will ensure the program is inclusive to all learners, and 
works to mitigate the specific barriers students face related to, but not limited to 
gender, language, economic status, disability status, violence in communities by 
integrating the principles of UDL and inclusive education into the approach. 
j. Flexibility. Given the challenges and constraints, the Applicant must present an 
adaptive management approach, ensuring the Activity can adapt and respond to 
challenges and shifts that might arise in Honduras over the life of the Activity, as well 
as potential shifts in policy and priorities for the U.S. Government. USAID may 
encourage the implementing partner to undertake additional activities that are 
within the parameters of this PD in response to unforeseen crises, challenges or 
changes in strategic priorities. Adjustments will be agreed upon through changes to 
annual work plans, and may require corresponding reductions in other planned 
activities in order to remain within the available obligated amount and budget ceiling. 
k. Geographic: The Activity will work in targeted geographic areas of Honduras. The 
primary focus will be areas that experience high levels of out-migration and insecurity 
as described above, and if necessary to reach Activity targets areas with high numbers 
of out-of-school youth. For more information on the Mission’s geo targeting strategy, 





12 Information on the USAID’s Reading MATTERS Conceptual Framework can be found at 
https://www.globalreadingnetwork.net/resources/usaid-reading-matters-conceptual-framework 


which includes a focus on 40 municipalities with high out-migration, please see the 
USAID/Honduras website: https://www.usaid.gov/honduras/fact-sheets/placed-based-
geographic 
l. Digital Technologies: The IPE Activity will integrate and leverage digital 
technologies to achieve the Activity results. The Applicant must identify ways to 
utilize digital technologies to support resource management, hybrid learning , as 
necessary, as well as improving transparency and reducing corruption within the 
education system. The Applicant will also draw on best practices to leverage 
technology to support improved learning outcomes, by identifying the ways in which 
technology can support teachers, and the ways technology can be leveraged to support 
instruction and learning for students. 
m. Engaging Local Organizations: USAID is looking for substantial local buy-in and 
engagement in this award. The Applicant shall identify opportunities to increase local 
engagement in decision making and strategic direction of this Activity and build local 
capacity in the provision of safe, relevant and quality education. The Activity includes 
a sizable sub-grants mechanism that will be used to engage local partners as well as an 
intermediary result focused specifically on strengthening the capacity of local CSOs 
and actors engaged in the education space. 





 

 

A.10 Monitoring and Evaluation: 

 

USAID/Honduras intends the Activity to be subject to rigorous monitoring and evaluation, including 
complexity-aware monitoring13 to ensure intended results and impact are being generated and to 
inform Activity course corrections if and when necessary. USAID/Honduras will monitor and 
evaluate Activity performance based on a Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) plan to be 
developed by the applicant. Activity evaluations will guide major activities and document lessons 
learned, as well as measure results at the end of the project. In compliance with ADS 201, the activity 
will also be subject to an external impact assessment. 

13 Additional information on complexity-aware monitoring can be found at 
https://usaidlearninglab.org/library/complexity-aware-monitoring-discussion-note-brief 

14 Rapid Education and Risk Analysis Toolkit available at: https://www.edu-links.org/resources/rapid-education-and-risk-
analysis-rera-toolkit-
1#:~:text=A%20Rapid%20Education%20and%20Risk,multiple%20contextual%20risks%20and%20assets.&text=It%20involves%20the%20collection%20and%20analysis%20of%20secondary%20and%20primary%20data. 

 

Monitoring during the life of activity will be critical to ensure programming responds to and 
addresses relevant contextual factors like rates of violence and irregular migration and the effects of 
political changes and natural hazards. In collaboration with USAID/Honduras, the applicant should 
conduct Rapid Education and Risk Analyses,14 conflict analyses, or a political economy analyses at 
various points throughout the life of the activity to ensure programming reflects an up to date 
understanding of the interaction of contextual risks and the education system. 

 

USAID is also retaining the services of a third-party activity to provide support for monitoring and 
evaluation. The MEL, monitored by the Program Office, will be used to inform technical direction to 
the applicant regarding within-scope adjustments that may be needed to the Activity work plan during 


implementation. Applicant implementation at the activity level will require the Applicant to 
cooperate and provide access to this activity for the purposes of evaluation, under the supervision of 
USAID/Honduras personnel. The evaluation design will be finalized in consultation with the 
applicant and will align with the annual work plan. However, the monitoring done by this third-party 
activity will not substitute nor supersede the applicant's obligations regarding implementation 
surveillance and reporting to USAID/Honduras officials, as appropriate. 

 

The applicant will coordinate and collaborate with this third-party activity, the anticipated Mission-
wide mechanism for Monitoring and Evaluation, and build on the work conducted under MESCLA 
around teacher training and coaching, enrollment, transition, online and distance learning modalities, 
and COVID-19. Additionally, the Applicant should consider the Education in Crisis and Conflict 
learning agenda and the foundational skills learning agenda, as well as other relevant learning 
agendas, and consider how this activity can contribute to global or regional learning questions on 
education outcomes, violence and irregular migration. The awardee should anticipate participating in 
broader learning efforts aimed at exploring the impact of strategically integrating projects from 
different sectors with the broader goal of reducing irregular migration. 

 

A.11 Collaboration, Learning and Adapting (CLA) 

 

USAID expects that the implementation of this Activity, and progress towards the aforementioned 
results, is guided by analysis of a wide variety of information sources and knowledge. These may 
include: M&E data, internal and/or external performance evaluations, innovations and new learning 
that bring to light new best practices or call into question received wisdom, collected observations 
from those who have particularly deep or unique insight in a given area, and complementary research 
studies, among others. The intent is to ensure that the partway to desired outcomes is continuously 
assessed and adjusted to yield the most effective course of action. 

 

The MEL Plan should apply best practices that meet USAID and international standards as well as 
organizational Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) approaches/processes throughout the 
Activity cycle to reward candid knowledge sharing and leadership of/participation in collaborative 
learning efforts. The Activity should integrate Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting (CLA) into the 
MEL plan and its implementation to maximize the use of M&E results for course corrections and 
adjusting implementation plans throughout the Activity life as deemed appropriate. 

 

A.12 Cross-cutting Considerations 

 

Youth: To build youth resilience and agency in order to become healthy, productive, and contributing 
citizens, USAID/Honduras requires the applicant to apply the Positive Youth Development (PYD) 
Framework in their technical approach. The PYD framework provides key guiding principles in how 
to engage youth in their own development, how they can contribute to USAID’s work, and to create 
an enabling environment for their development. Applicants should consider involving youth in 
activities that promote increased engagement in education and other social and political processes and 
topical public policy matters as well as initiatives that impart practical technical and leadership skills. 

 

Gender Equality: The applicant must address gender integration during implementation of the award 
and demonstrate in its application how it would integrate gender equality into core approaches, 
incorporating the principles outlined in USAID’s Gender Equality and Female Empowerment Policy. 
Incorporating gender considerations into these interventions involves an in-depth analysis of all of the 


dimensions of gender inclusion, equality, and empowerment, including employment, access to 
property and resources, health, education, governance, gender-based violence, and LGBTI rights. 
Each intervention must be based on gender gaps and dynamics found in the targeted communities, 
and gender sensitive and responsive to ensure women, men, male and female youth, minorities, 
disabled, ethnic, religious, and transgender persons are an integrated part of interventions. The 
applicant should provide local entities guidance, tools, training, resources and defining roles and 
responsibilities for gender integration in program planning, design, implementation, monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting, and organizational capacity development. 

 

Constraints or Challenges: The Applicant must demonstrate an understanding of the local context, 
and the specific challenges and barriers that might impact Activity implementation. The Applicant 
must develop an Activity that is responsive to the non-permissive environment in Honduras. The 
Applicant has to consider the challenges from Covid-19 that can impact Activity implementation, 
including public health concerns and safety, as well as disruptions that can impact operations. 
Additionally, the applicant must also consider the ways in which corruption and a lack of 
transparency can impact education management and delivery. The Applicant must clearly articulate 
plans to mitigate and respond to natural disasters, particularly hurricanes, and the impact on the 
education system after disasters. Finally, the Applicant must identify the ways in which the Activity 
will address security concerns, particularly when schools close temporarily, as well as potential 
political transitions in the upcoming election. 

 

Sustainability and Systems Focus: The Applicant will consider sustainability as a prerequisite to 
any provided assistance. With a focus on resilience and locally led development, the applicant must 
demonstrate the ways in which the intervention will be sustained and incorporated into the education 
system. The Applicant must identify the particular conditions that should be incorporated into the 
Activity to ensure sustainability of the interventions, including, from a systems perspective, the key 
blockages or systems-level changes that need to be addressed to achieve the Activity’s results. 
Changes which result in more students completing primary and lower secondary education will 
require changes in the dynamics between perspectives, roles, relationships, rules, and resources at the 
individual, household, peer-group, and community levels. The Activity must work to affect change 
across these dimensions and levels in order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of moving 
students through the education system. 

 

The Activity is expected to support, and measure impact related to local sustainability. Sustainability 
planning is in part expected to address this requirement as well as advance key indicators such as 
citizen and targeted CSO capacity strengthening. Furthermore, partnership with local non-
governmental and civil society organizations to conduct proposed activities is part of a sustainability 
strategy to promote local participation and ownership and increase impact. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A – PROGRAM DESCRIPTION] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

B.1 Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID intends to award One (1) Cooperative Agreement (CA) pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends to 
provide US$80,000,000.00 in total USAID funding over a Five (5) year period. 

 

USAID reserves the right to change the funding amounts, cycle, and terms of the resulting award as a 
result of availability of funding and U.S. Government requirements. The recipient will be notified in 
writing should such changes occur. 

 

B.2 Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 

 

As described in the Program Description – See Section A of the NOFO. 

 

B.3 Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

 

The anticipated period of performance is Five (5) years. The estimated start date will be upon the 
Agreement Officer’s signature of the award, or as determined by the Agreement Officer. 

 

B.4 Substantial Involvement 

 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID/Honduras anticipates a close working partnership with the successful 
Applicant for this activity to assist in achieving the objectives. The specific areas of USAID involvement will 
include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Approval of the Recipient’s Annual Implementation Plans during performance by the designated 
Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). Significant changes to the approved Annual Work Plan will 
require additional AOR approval. 

 

2. Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation: The Recipient must request prior review and 
written concurrence from the AOR and obtain review and written approval from the AO before entering into 
any sub-awards under the performance of this agreement. 

 

3. Approval of the Recipient’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan by the AOR. 

 

4. Approval of selection of Recipient Key Personnel: The Recipient shall request prior approval from the 
USAID Agreement Officer (AO) for the replacement of Key Personnel or changes in the Key Personnel 
positions. 

 

B.5 Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 937, 
which includes the United States, the Recipient country, and developing countries other than advanced 
developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited source. 

For more information on authorized geographic code, please see ADS 310: 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/310.pdf 

 


B.6 Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Improving Pathways to 
Education (IPE) which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible 
for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration 
of the award through the application of sound management practices. The Recipient will assume 
responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, 
program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. 

 

B.7 Selection of Instrument 

 

The Improving Pathways to Education (IPE) Activity aims to provide funds to an organization who 
will provide assistance to the Government of Honduras, specifically the Ministry of Education, and 
Honduran private and public education sector stakeholders. The overall objective of the IPE Activity 
is to increase access to safe, quality basic education for children and youth, by improving socio-
economic opportunities, contributing to the multi-sectoral impacts of violence prevention efforts, and 
decreasing irregular migration. This will be achieved through evidence-informed interventions under 
the following three results: 

 

1. Enhanced governance for effectiveness, transparency, and responsiveness in the education system; 

 

2. Increased access to and retention in inclusive, quality education, particularly for the most 
marginalized learners; and 

 

3. Improved safety in and around schools 

 

Increased education access, ensuring safe learning spaces, and improved quality in service provision 
will result in more citizens (stakeholders, families, and youth) committed to education as a means for 
productive and fulfilling lives in Honduras, thus contributing to higher level Mission objectives of 
decreased irregular migration and violence prevention. The Activity will approach the stated 
challenges from a systems perspective, working with stakeholders at national, regional, and local 
levels to evaluate the key blockages and enablers within the system to identify levers for addressing 
those blockages and reap the benefits of potential opportunities. 

 

[END OF SECTION B – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

C.1 Eligible Applicants 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

These eligibility requirements apply to both the principal applicant and to any sub-awardee. 

 

While for-profit firms may participate, pursuant to 2 CFR 200.400(g), it is USAID policy not to 

award profit to prime recipients and subrecipients under assistance instruments. However, while 

profit is not allowed for sub-awards, the prohibition does not apply when the recipient acquires 

goods and services in accordance with 2 CFR 200.317 -326, “Procurement Standards.” Forgone 

profit does not qualify as cost-share. 

 

Each applicant must be found to be a responsible entity before receiving an award. The Agreement 
Officer (AO) may determine that a pre-award survey is required in accordance with ADS 303.3.9.1 to 
determine whether the applicant has the necessary organization, experience, accounting and 
operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with established U.S. Government standards, laws, and 
regulations. Applicants who do not currently meet all USAID requirements for systems and controls 
may still be eligible under special award considerations and should not be discouraged from applying. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. The prime recipient is encouraged to promote involvement of 
“underutilized” partners and local organizations in the implementation of this activity. 

 

Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial assistance on the same basis as 
any other organization and are subject to the protections and requirements of Federal law. 

 

C.2 Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

USAID has established a mandatory minimum recipient cost share of 10% of the total estimated cost 
for this award, which is approximately US$8,000,000.00, to be contributed through the life of the 
activity. Such funds may be provided directly by the recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and 
foundation donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private businesses 
that contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities at the country level, but not 
from other USG funding sources. This may include contribution of staff level of effort, office space 
or other facilities or equipment which may be used for the program, provided by the recipient. For 
guidance on cost sharing in grants and cooperative agreements please see ADS 303.3.10 and 2 CFR 
200.306 for U.S. NGOs. For non-US NGOs, all cost sharing would be subject to the Required as 
Applicable Provision “Cost Sharing” in the Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 303 Standard 
Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental Organizations. 

 

C.3 Other 

 

a) Limitations on Submissions 

 

Each applicant is limited to one application submission under this NOFO as the prime Applicant. 


There is no limitation on being included as a potential sub-awardee across multiple applications. 

The use of exclusive teaming arrangements is discouraged. 

 

b) Eligibility of Goods and Services for USAID Financing 

 

● Applicable Rules 

The recipient must comply with USAID’s Rules for Procurement of Commodities and Services 

Financed by USAID in 22 CFR 228 in the procurement and long-term lease (as defined in 22 CFR 
228.01) of goods and services with USAID funds. These rules govern the source of USAID financed 
commodities and the nationality of suppliers of USAID-financed commodities and 

services, which must be in a country that is included in the authorized geographic code. These rules 
apply to the recipient’s procurement contracts (as defined in 2 CFR 200) with vendors and to 
subcontracts at all tiers under the recipient’s procurement contracts. 

 

● Sub-Awards 

These rules do not apply to sub-awards (as defined in 2 CFR 200.92) but do apply to the 

procurement and long-term lease of goods and services by sub-recipients (as defined in 2 CFR 

200.93) at all tiers, and to those sub-recipients’ procurement contracts and subcontracts with 

vendors at all tiers. These rules do not apply to procurement or long-term lease of goods and 

services with cost-sharing or program income funds. 

 

● Restricted Commodities 

“Restricted Commodities” are certain agricultural commodities, motor vehicles (excluding driver 

service), pharmaceuticals, condoms and contraceptives, pesticides, used equipment, and non-local 
purchase of fertilizer. Special rules apply to restricted commodities and are described in ADS 
312.3.3. 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION C – ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION] 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

D.1 Agency Point of Contact 

 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Nathan Olah 

Supervisory Agreement Officer 

USAID/Honduras 

Email: nolah@usaid.gov 

 

The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

 Anne L. Busaka 

 Sr. Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

 USAID/Honduras 

 Email: abusaka@usaid.gov 

 

The above contact information is only for informational purposes. The NOFO itself and any 
subsequent amendments can be found at www.grants.gov. All Applications must be submitted 
according to instructions contained in this NOFO. 

 

In order to maintain a fair and transparent funding opportunity, USAID maintains strict guidelines on 
who within USAID may be contacted regarding applications or questions about the opportunity. 
Applicants may only contact USAID via the email address provided above in this NOFO. Failure to 
comply with the USAID points of contact guidance mandated in the NOFO may disqualify the 
Applicant(s). 

 

D.2 Questions and Answers 

 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing via email to oaahonduras@usaid.gov 
no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a 
prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective 
applicants as an amendment to this NOFO on www.grants.gov , if that information is necessary in 
submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 
Please check www.grants.gov for any amendments. 

 

D.3 General Content and Form of Application 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be submitted 
in two separate parts: 

 

(a) the Technical Application; and 

(b) the Business (Cost) Application. 


 

This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please see 
subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and Business 
(Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only while the 
Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 
alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone 
number and email address); 
● Program name 
● Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under 
ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the issuing 
office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve only as 
a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part of the merit 
review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English . 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive page 
numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 12 
point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted 
in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no hidden 
formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to the 



Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application submission is the 
unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so may 
be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should retain a 
copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

D.4 Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 
Applicants must retain proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of 
delivery receipt date and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to oaahonduras@usaid.gov. Email submissions must 
include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading (NOFO No.: 
72052222RFA00005; Title: Improving Pathways to Education (IPE); name of the Applicant. In 
addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the 
email relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their 
attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, 
the first email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost 
Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical application 
into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide instructions on how to 
collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in compiling electronic applications 
if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own email 
to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in transmission, 
please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in the file name if 
submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same email more than 
once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several hours 
occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the application in 
sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the government 
infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Honduras cannot guarantee 
their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 10 MB limit per email. 

 

Restriction on Disclosure and Use of Data 

 

a. Applicants that include in their applications data that they do not want disclosed to the public 

for any purpose, or used by the Government except for evaluation purposes shall: 


 

i. Mark the title page with the following legend: “This application includes data that shall 

not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed - 

in whole or in part - for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, 

a grant or cooperative agreement is awarded to this Applicant as a result of - or in 

connection with - the submission of this data, the Government shall have the right to 

duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting award. This 

restriction does not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data 

if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 

restriction are contained in sheets [insert numbers or other identification of sheets]”; and 

 

ii. Mark each page containing restricted data with the following legend: “Use or disclosure 

of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of this 

application.” 

 

b. Applicants are advised that it is anticipated that the successful program narrative, submitted as 

part of the technical application, will become the Program Description of the cooperative 

agreement awarded as a result of this NOFO. Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act of 

1981, the public is entitled to request information from Agency award files. As a general rule, 

information will be disclosed except: 

 

i. Information submitted in response to this NOFO, prior to award of the grant, or 

modifications or revisions thereto. 

 

ii. Information properly classified or administratively controlled by USAID. 

 

iii. Information specifically exempted from disclosure under the Freedom of Information 

Act. 

 

c. Upon award of the cooperative agreement resulting from this NOFO, USAID will disclose, use, 

or duplicate any information submitted in response to this NOFO to the extent provided in the 

award, and as required by the Freedom of Information Act. 

 

Pre-Award Audits/Surveys and Discussions 

 

USAID reserves the right to perform a pre-award audit/survey which may include but is not limited 

to: (1) interviews with individuals to establish their ability to perform award duties under project 

conditions; (2) a review of the Applicant's financial condition, business and personnel policies and 

procedures, etc.; and (3) site visits to the Applicant's institution. However, it must be understood 

that USAID undertakes no obligation to perform any of the foregoing elements. Accordingly, 

Applicants should submit their best and most complete application initially. 

 

Authority to Commit USAID 

 

The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit USAID to the expenditure 

of public funds. No costs allocable to the proposed award will be reimbursed by USAID before 

receipt of either a fully executed grant or cooperative agreement, or a specific written authorization 

from the Agreement Officer. 


 

D.5 Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application must 
demonstrate the applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this 
program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit review 
criteria found in this NOFO. 

 

Please note that per ADS 303.3.20, it is USAID policy that English is the official language of all 
award documents because a translation may not convey the full meaning of the original. Therefore, 
applications in response to this NOFO must be in English, and in U.S. dollars. 

 

Applicants must organize the application to follow the technical evaluation criteria specified in 
Section E. The page length for the application shall not exceed fifteen (25) pages. Within these 
pages, the executive summary shall not exceed three (3) page. The only annexes to be evaluated are 
listed hereunder and have page limitation as indicated below. 

 

(a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 


 

(b) Table of Contents 

 

Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit review 
criteria. 

 

c) Executive Summary (Three (3) pages) 


 

The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical 
Application. 

 

 i) Technical Understanding and Approach 

 ii) Management Approach 

 iii) Institutional Capacity 

 iv) Annexes: (see below) 

 Annex C – Activity Monitoring and Learning Plan (not to exceed 3 pages) 

 Annex D - Activity Work Plan (not to exceed 3 pages) 

 Annex E - Rapid Start-Up Plan (not to exceed 3 pages) 

 Annex F - Sustainability and Local Engagement Plan (not to exceed 2 pages) 

 Annex G - Past Performance Narrative (not to exceed 3 pages) 

 

d) Content of the Technical Application 

 

Technical applications should include the sections and content below and should be directed at the 

program as described in Section A. Funding Opportunity Description. The technical application will 

be the critical item of consideration in selection of an Applicant for an award. The information 

provided in the technical application must be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The 

technical application must demonstrate the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to 

achieving the goals of this program and specify the specific results to be achieved. The merit review 

criteria set forth in Section E. Application Review Information of this NOFO indicate the relative 


importance of each criterion so that Applicants will know which areas require emphasis in the 

preparation of the technical application. Applicants are advised that lack of completeness or 

superficiality of the application may constitute grounds for excluding it from consideration. 

 

It is anticipated that a portion of the successful application will become the Program Description for 

the award resulting from this NOFO. Thus, applications submitted in response to this NOFO 

should, in addition to being responsive to the requirements described herein, be written in the active 

voice and in results-oriented terms in order to address what is proposed to be done; why it is 

proposed to be done, how it is proposed to be done, who will do it, where it will be done, when it 

will be done, and the anticipated results and impact. 

 

The Technical Application includes the information set forth below: 

 

1) Technical Understanding and Approach (See Section E.2.1) 

 

Technical understanding and approach will be the most important factor for consideration in 

selection for award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. The technical understanding and 

approach should be specific, complete and presented concisely. The application should demonstrate 
the Applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this activity. The 

application should take into account the requirements of the activity and evaluation criteria found in 

the RFA/NOFO. 

 

The Applicant in the technical understanding and approach narrative should present an overall 

strategic approach, with proposed activity components, and specific interventions, that will 

effectively and efficiently contribute to achieving the activity goal, expected results, and outcomes. 

The Recipient will serve as the technical lead, working with both public and private sectors, to 

accelerate and sustain improvements in basic education in Honduras. The technical approach will 

describe in sufficient detail the conceptual methodology and techniques for the implementation of a 

dynamic, innovative, and results oriented IPE activity. The expected results and outcome of the 

proposed technical approach is to dramatically improve education outcomes for children and youth 

in Honduras by ways of improving the equity and quality of basic education services and 

strengthening the Ministry of Education and key stakeholder capacity to act as a stewards for 

improving quality of basic education services, particularly in those areas with high outmigration. 

 

Applicants should present a comprehensive plan to achieve specific, measurable, and sustainable 

results through technically sound and cutting-edge approaches which align with the Program 
Description’s expected results and outcomes. This plan is expected to include innovative solutions to 
address the major education and youth challenges confronting Honduras, with an emphasis on 
strengthening Honduran systems. 

 

As part of the Applicant’s narrative, the Applicant is expected to clearly articulate the project’s 

technical approach, indicating how it will address Honduras’ core educational challenges from a 

systems perspective, including identifying core systems-level changes that are expected and how the 

project would seek to bring about those changes. The plan should indicate how the private sector 

and other stakeholders would be engaged to advance educational outcomes. The application should 

also demonstrate the Applicant’s understanding of Honduras current children and education context 

and landscape, including both challenges and opportunities. The contextual analysis should also 

reflect a strong understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on education, the migration context and 


the security environment. In addition to demonstrating this contextual understanding, the application 

should also indicate how the project will address these factors. 

 

Additionally, Applicants should highlight how their proposed plans address the following: 1) gender 

and social inclusion; 2) Elevation of youth voice and engagement, with an emphasis on strategically 

engaging with youth throughout the project cycle to address educational challenges; 3) 

Demonstrating realistic innovative models that can be institutionalized based on results; and 3) 

adaptive collaborative learning; 4) country ownership. And finally, the Applicant’s approach should 

demonstrate how they will partner with existing USAID/Honduras activities in order to create 

synergies, maximize resources, and promote a holistic approach to improving basic education 

outcomes and results. 

 

In support of the above narrative, the Applicant must include the following as Annexes, which are 

included within the Evaluation Criteria. The Work Plan should include a clearly defined and 

comprehensive Gantt chart that outlines milestones and demonstrates linkages across different 

activities. The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan should incorporate systems-related indicators and 

clearly reflect a plan for incorporating Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) approaches into 

the project. 

 

● Annex C- Activity Monitoring and Learning Plan ( not to exceed 3 pages) 

● Annex D- Activity Work Plan (not to exceed 3 pages) 

CR 

2) Management Approach (See Section E.2.2) 

 

The Management Approach will be the second most important factor for consideration in 

selection for award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement. This Approach should include both 

a management and staffing plan and a rapid start-up plan. 

 

The applicants must propose a Management Approach of how they will implement the proposed 

Technical Approach. Specifically, applicants must provide the following: 

 

(i) The Management and Staffing Plan should propose a core management and staffing structure 

for the Activity. The core management and staffing structure should possess the technical competence 
and strategic management skills to manage the project, and supplement that team as needed with 

technical specialists. The staffing structure should describe how the proposed combination of 

management, long-term staff, and short-term technical assistance will collectively possess the 

requisite technical and management expertise, skills and capabilities to effectively implement 

the proposed Technical Approach. Additionally, applicants may propose requisite consortia, 

partnerships, and/or sub-partnering arrangements and other relationships necessary to implement the 

Technical Approach. If so, Applicants should explain how they will manage the proposed 

arrangement to foster a single unified identity under the Activity. 

 

Other key considerations include the following: maximizing use of local staff (with additional 

considerations of gender balance); integrating capacity building of relevant local stakeholders 

into activity implementation; integrating gender equality and inclusive development throughout 

activity implementation; and measures to ensure collaborative learning and adaptive 

management are fully integrated throughout activity implementation. 

 


(ii) An Organizational Chart displaying the Activity’s organizational structure and office(s) 

with lines of authority, and general descriptions for all home office and field employees. It will 

be used as a reference for the Management and Staffing Plan. It will be an Annex to the 

Technical Application and is not included in the page limitation. 

 

(iii) A Table of Management Positions with Qualifications displaying minimum (required) 

and preferred qualifications/attributes to determine qualified candidates for the core 

management positions proposed in the Management and Staffing Plan. This table may include 

strategic and technical positions that are critical to implementing the proposed Technical 

Approach. It will be an Annex to the Technical Application and is not included in the page 

limitation. 

 

Applicants MUST NOT submit names, CVs, or other information on candidates (actual or 
illustrative) for the proposed key personnel positions in the Technical Application. Applicants can 
propose up to four (4) key personnel positions. Subject to approval by USAID, the qualifications for 
the selected key personnel positions will be included in the resulting award. After award, the 
Awardee will propose qualified candidates for key personnel positions no later than 30 days after 
award, subject to the review and approval of the Agreement Officer’s Representative and the 
Agreement Officer. At that time, the Awardee will provide a Statement of Qualifications (SOQ) for 
all proposed key personnel describing how the candidate meets or exceeds the qualifications of the 
proposed position. SOQs include items normally associated with CVs or resumes, including but not 
limited to information such as work experience, references, language capability, and progressive 
levels of responsibilities. 

 

In terms of the Rapid Start Up Plan, the Applicant must describe a proposed rapid start-up plan to 

support a rapid, effective and efficient start-up of the proposed activity. Refer to Instructions under 

Criterion 2. 

 

In support of the above narrative, the Applicant must include the following as Annex: 

 

Annex E - Rapid Start-Up Plan (not to exceed 3 pages) 

 

3) Institutional Capacity (See Section E.2.3) 

 

The extent to which the Applicant demonstrates effective engagement with local organizations and 

institutions as well as strong organizational capacity and management expertise for implementing 
IPE’s objectives. 

 

This includes, but is not limited to: 

 

● Explanation of the Applicant’s plan for engagement with local civil society and other 

stakeholders in the context of the IPE activity, and their plan for helping to increase local civil 

society’s voice in the project and in achieving the project’s objectives (Special consideration 
will be given to applications that focused on increasing meaningful youth engagement in the 
IPE 

activity and in education decision-making) 

 


a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 
b) SF 424 Form(s) 








● Explanation of how Applicant will substantively involve and build capacity of local 
partners to advance Honduras’ journey to self-reliance. 

 

● Applicant’s previous experience in working with local organizations and stakeholders on 
projects of similar scope and objectives of the IPE activity. 

 

● Applicant’s previous experience successfully implementing projects with a similar scope 
and objectives of the IPE activity. 

 

In support of the above points, the Applicant must include the following Annexes: 

 

Annex F - Sustainability and Local Engagement Plan (not to exceed 2 pages) 

Annex G- Past Performance Narrative (not to exceed 3 pages) 

 

The Application must include a Sustainability and Local Engagement Plan that outlines how the 

Applicant will substantially involve and build the capacity of local partners, including youth, to 

contribute to IPE’s goals and objectives. The Application must also include a brief narrative outlining 

the Applicant’s previous experience in successfully implementing projects with similar scope and 

objectives of the IPE activity. The latter should include the names and contact information of the 
persons responsible for overseeing the projects (i.e., the agreements officer’s representatives). 

 

D.6 Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise as 
possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must illustrate the 
entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Budget summaries must show US Dollars (USD) 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for 
the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. Applicants 
should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

 

 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms can 
be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

 


c) Required Certifications and Assurances 











Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the Recipient” 
ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if your 
organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of Acquisition 
and Assistance (M/OAA). 
d) Budget and Budget Narrative 





 

 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) with 
visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including itemization of the 
federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden or otherwise 
inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required to make award, 
and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget Narrative must contain sufficient 
detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted 
costs address any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The 
Budget Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination 
that the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

 


The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to determine 
that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the applicant’s 
program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart 
E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out by 
budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, 
and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken 
down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable 
for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of 
the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on personnel 
compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of 
compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used and 
supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an agency 
of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its approval. If 
an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose a rate and 
explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must include a 
detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) 
and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the trips. 
Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel policies. 
When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as company 
travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit and 
quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and the 
basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs and 
reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market 
conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of 
the property leased. 


 


5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as 
the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – Construction will not be authorized under this award. 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 
miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant 
should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and 
their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the 
narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will charge 
all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 CFR 200. 
The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the applicable 
supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate methods: 

 

 

Method 

 

Eligibility 

Initial application 
requirements 

Direct 
Charge 
Only 

 

Any 
applicant 

See above on direct costs 

Existing 
Negotiated 
Indirect 
Cost Rate 
Agreement 
(NICRA) 

 

Any 
applicant 
with an 
approved 
NICRA 

Submit your approved NICRA and the associated 
disclosed practices. 

De minimis 
rate of 10% 
of Modified 
Total Direct 
Costs 
(MTDC) 

 

Any 
applicant 
that does 
not have a 
current 
NICRA 

Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs but may not be double charged or 
inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this 
methodology once elected must be used consistently for 
all Federal awards until such time as a non-Federal 
entity chooses to negotiate for a rate, which the non-
Federal entity may apply to do at any time. The 
applicant must describe which cost elements it charges 

indirectly vs. directly. 

Indirect 
Costs 
Charged As 
A Fixed 
Amount 

 

Certain U.S. 
educational 
institutions 
& non-U.S. 
non- profit 

Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following (For Education institutions, see 2 
CFR 200 App III): 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for previous 
fiscal year and estimates for the current year 





 

 

organizations 
may request, 

● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day 
operations of the organization, including categories such 


but approval is 

as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 

at the 

administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are 

discretion of 

identifiable to more than one program or activity(ies), 

the AO 

such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and 

 

maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the 

 

previous fiscal year and estimates for the current year 

 

● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably 


and consistently across all programs and activities of using 

 

a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 

 

each program or activity(ies) to which the cost applies. 

No current 

Any applicant 

A NICRA may be negotiated after award at the discretion of 

NICRA, but 

may request 

the Agency. Provisional rates may be set forth in the award 

applicant has 

but approval is 

subject to audit and finalization. The applicant must identify 

an indirect 

at the 

the indirect cost rate and base it is proposing. See USAID’s 

rate other than 

discretion of 

Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit Organizations for 

the de 

the Agency 

further guidance. 

minimis 

 

 



 

 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

9) Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be 
provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the 
basis of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of 
the cost share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in 
implementing the resulting award. 
e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 





 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

e) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 


● Name of organization 
● DUNS Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 
f) Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 





 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to 
Help, then to International Registrants. 

 

 

 


g) History of Performance 
h) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 








 

 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed three (3) years as follows: 

 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information 
concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such 
information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information 
and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award. The Marking Plan may include a request for approval of one or more exceptions to the 
marking requirements in 2 CFR 700.16. 

 

Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 

Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and how it 

is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 

 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 

rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by the 

Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 

programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 


portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 

Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 

cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

 

e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 

 

(1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, such as 

plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

(2) The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 

 

(i) USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of the 

USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people” as found 

on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of 

the RFA or APS states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an 

additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(ii) USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by (or 

with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID Identity 

when acknowledging contributions. 

 

(iii) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 

identity. 

 

(iv) If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the applicant must 

explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased during publicity for the 

program or project. 

 

(v) USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity that 

competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a separate logo to 

consistently identify this program, the applicant must attach a copy of the proposed 

logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use 

of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 

direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program to 

beneficiaries. 

 

(i) Describe the main program message. 

 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 

announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to host 


country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, and so 

forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, “USAID is 

from the American People.” 

 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people support 

this project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 

including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 

 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials and 

related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly acknowledged, 

and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information is 

adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost 

data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 

made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

 

Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 

 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and other 
items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID logo and 
brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity is the official 
marking for the Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at http://www.usaid.gov/branding. 
Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or 
substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 

Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID 

programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth, in the budget 

portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and negotiation with the 

Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated Amount of the grant, 

cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 

 

(1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials that 


the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part of the 

award, including: 

 

(i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible infrastructure 

projects or other sites physical in nature; 

 

(ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audio- visual productions, 

public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, promotional, 

informational, media, or communications products funded by USAID; 

 

(iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, including 

commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 

programs; and 

 

(iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the applicant's 

identity. 

 

(v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, seminars, 

exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public activities. If the 

USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is encouraged to otherwise 

acknowledge USAID and the support of the American people. 

 

(2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

(i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID Identity; 

 

(ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the program 

deliverables; 

 

(iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program deliverables, 

and where the applicant will place the marking; 

 

(iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the USAID 

Identity, and 

 

(v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

(3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an explanation 

of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an exemption if USAID 

marking requirements would: 

 

(i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or materials where 

independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the program and materials. The 

applicant must identify the USAID Development Objective, Interim Result, or 

program goal furthered by an appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the 

award is presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples of 


i) Funding Restrictions 











material for which an exemption is sought. 

 

(ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 

recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. The applicant 

must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen as credible. 

 

(iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, regulations, 

policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or audits, public service 

announcements, or other communications. The applicant must explain why each 

particular item or product is better positioned as host-country government item or 

product. 

 

(iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how marking the item 

or commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

(v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why marking 

would not be cost beneficial or practical. 

 

(vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The applicant 

must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would violate that norm 

or otherwise be inappropriate. 

 

(vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 

international law violated by the marking. 

 

f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness and will 

approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be reviewed to ensure 

the above information is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the 

award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 

exemptions, will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement, 
and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

[END OF PRE-AWARD TERMS] 

 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 


j) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 














Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 

employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 

competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 

impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 

personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 

obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits the applications. 

Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 

the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 

ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 

aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 

this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 

limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to 
nonpublic information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 

applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 

funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 

notification from the applicant. 

 

[END OF PRE-AWARD TERMS] 

 

D.7 Pre-Award Responsibility Determination and Risk Assessment 

 

Upon consideration of award or during the discussions leading to an award, the selected 
Applicant may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary for the 
Agreement Officer to make an affirmative determination of responsibility. 

 

IMPORTANT NOTE: 

 

Applicants should not submit the information below with their Applications. The information in 
this section is provided so that Applicants may become familiar with additional documentation 
that may be requested by the AO before award in order to make the responsibility determination: 

 


These documents may include, but are not limited to: 

 

1. Audited financial statements for the past three (3) years that have been audited by a 
certified public accountant or other auditor satisfactory to USAID; 

 

2. Bylaws, constitution, and articles of incorporation, if applicable; 

 

3. Copies of organizational travel, procurement, financial management, accounting 
manual and personnel policies and procedures, especially regarding salary, promotion, 
leave, differentials, etc., and indicate whether such policies and procedures have been 
reviewed and approved by any agency of the Federal Government. If so, provide the 
name, address, and phone number of the cognizant reviewing official; 

 

4. Other documentation, as required by the Agreement Officer, to substantiate that the 
Applicant: 

 

● Has adequate financial resources or the ability to obtain such resources as 
required during the performance of the Cooperative Agreement; 

 

● Has the ability to comply with the award’s terms and conditions, taking into 
account all existing and currently prospective commitments of the Applicant, non-
governmental and governmental; 

 

● Has a satisfactory record of performance. Past relevant unsatisfactory 
performance is ordinarily sufficient to justify a finding of non-responsibility, 
unless there is clear evidence of subsequent satisfactory performance; 

 

● Has a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics; 

 

● Is otherwise qualified and eligible to receive a Cooperative Agreement/Grant 
under applicable laws and regulations (e.g., Equal Employment Opportunity 
Laws). 

 

An award may be made only by the Agreement Officer after making a positive responsibility 

determination that the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary 
management competence in planning and carrying out assistance programs, specifically the 
proposed Activity; and that it will practice mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for 
funds and other assets provided by USAID. 

 

For organizations that are new to working with USAID or for organizations with outstanding 
audit findings, or otherwise at USAID’s discretion, USAID may perform a pre-award survey to 
assess the Applicant’s management and financial capabilities. If notified by USAID that a pre-
award survey is necessary, Applicants must prepare, in advance, the required information and 
documents. See ADS 303.3.9.1 at https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303 for more 
information on pre-award surveys. 

 


Please note that a pre-award survey does not commit USAID to make any award. 

 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION D – APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION] 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

E.1 Criteria 

 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters 
which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which 
all applications will be evaluated. 

 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

 

E.2 Review and Selection Process 

 

The submitted technical information will be evaluated by a technical evaluation committee using 

the criteria shown above. The cost/business application will be reviewed by the Agreement 

Officer/Agreement Specialist. 

 

As a result of this process, USAID intends to select the apparently successful recipient based 
upon the initial application submission. Once the selection is made, the Government may address 
any concerns to the selected recipient for resolution. However, the Government reserves the right 
to negotiate with all applicants prior to selection of the successful recipient if in the best interest 
of the Government. 

 

If USAID and the apparently successful Applicant cannot come to a mutual understanding 
during the course of discussions, or if the apparently successful Applicant is unable to provide 
satisfactory Technical and Cost Applications, or does not meet deadlines for submissions, or 
presents an unacceptable risk as a result of the risk assessment, then the Agreement Officer may 
designate the next highest-evaluated Applicant as the apparently successful Applicant. This 
decision is at the sole discretion of the Agreement Officer. The Agreement Officer’s decision 
regarding funding of an award is final and not subject to review. 

 

Note: Section C.2 provides a minimum required cost share of 10% for this activity. 
Applications that do not meet the minimum cost share requirement may not be eligible for award 
consideration. While it is a minimum requirement for eligibility, cost share will not be 
considered in the merit review criteria. 

 

The Technical application will be evaluated in accordance with the Merit Evaluation Criteria set 
forth below: 

 

a) Merit Review 


 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following 


criteria by major categories and shown in descending order of importance. This will allow the 
Applicants identify which areas require emphasis in the preparation of the applications. 

 

 

Criteria 

Criterion Name 

Criterion 1 

Technical Understanding and Approach 

Sub Criterion 1.1 

Systems and Technical Approach 

Sub Criterion 1.2 

Work Plan and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Plan 

Sub Criterion 1.3 

Contextual Understanding 

Criterion 2 

Management Approach 

Sub Criterion 2.1 

Management and Staffing Plan 

Sub Criterion 2.2 

Rapid Start-Up Plan 

Criterion 3 

Institutional Capacity 

Sub Criterion 3.1 

Local stakeholder engagement 

Sub Criterion 3.2 

Past performance 



 

E.2.1 Technical Understanding and Approach 

 

The applicants Technical Understanding and Approach will be evaluated based on the following: 

 

The extent to which the Applicant’s proposed technical approach (including systems approach; 

development/country context, including understanding and incorporation of migration, COVID-
19, and security factors; approach to private sector engagement; strategic approach to youth 

engagement, and broader plan for gender and social inclusion; implementation strategy and 

collaboration with existing efforts to address the basic education needs of children and youth in 
high out migration areas) comprehensively describes convincing, sound, realistic, and 
sustainable approaches which will achieve the results specified in the Program Description. 

 

E.2.2 Management Approach 

 

The applicants Management Approach will be evaluated based on the following: 

 

(a) The extent to which the Applicant’s Management Approach demonstrates the capability 

to successfully implement the proposed Technical Application, which fully integrates 

maximizing use of local staff (with additional considerations of gender balance); integrating 

capacity building of relevant local stakeholders into activity implementation; integrating 

gender equality and inclusive development throughout activity implementation; and measures 

to ensure collaborative learning and adaptive management. 

 

(b) The Applicant’s Management and Staffing Plan and Organizational Chart will be 

evaluated as part of this evaluation criteria. 

 

(c) The applicant’s Rapid Start-up Plan will be evaluated in terms of timelines, feasibility and 

purported effectiveness. 


E.2.3 Institutional Capacity 

 

The applicants Institutional Capacity will be evaluated based on the following: 

 

The extent to which the Applicant demonstrates a strategic and feasible plan for meaningfully 
engaging local stakeholders, including youth, in the IPE activity, and demonstrated past 
performance in successfully implementing projects with a similar scope and set of objectives. 

 

This includes two sub-criteria in descending order of importance: 

 

1. Local Stakeholder Engagement 

2. Past Performance 

 

For the first aspect, the Applicant must describe a plan for engaging with local civil society and 
other stakeholders in the context of the IPE activity, including plans for increasing local civil 
society’s voice in the project and in achieving the project’s objectives (Special consideration will 
be given to applications that focused on increasing meaningful youth engagement in the IPE 
activity and in education decision-making). The Applicant must also demonstrate previous 
experience in effectively engaging with local stakeholders. Refer to Instructions under 

Criterion 3. 

. 

The Local Stakeholder Engagement will be evaluated to the extent to which the Applicant’s 

Sustainability and Local Engagement Plan demonstrates a strategic and effective approach for 
engaging stakeholders, including youth, in the IPE project and in achieving IPE objectives, as 
well as demonstrated past performance in effectively engaging with local stakeholders. 

In terms of past performance, the Applicant must describe its past performance in successfully 

implementing projects with a similar scope and set of objectives to the IPE activity. Refer to 
Instructions under Criterion 3. 

 

In terms of evaluation, applicants will be evaluated based on the demonstration of experience 
and success in implementing similar activities in terms of scope, magnitude, and complexity; and 
the extent to which the Applicant demonstrates how they have achieved previous program 
successes. 

 

b) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 


Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 
2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

 

[END OF SECTION E – APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION] 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

F.1 Federal Award Notices 

 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

F.2 Administrative & National Policy Requirements 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 

For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

F.3 Reporting Requirements 

 

● Financial Reporting: 


 

 Financial Reports will be in keeping with 2 CFR 200.327. In accordance with 2 CFR 200.327, 
the SF-425 will be required as follows: 

 

The Recipient must submit the Federal Financial Form (SF-425) on a quarterly basis via 
electronic format. These reports must be submitted within 30 calendar days from the end of each 
quarter. 

 

● Performance Reporting 


 

1. Annual Work Plans. A draft annual work plan for the first year of the program will be 
submitted within 60 days of award, developed in consultation with USAID and relevant 
stakeholders. In subsequent years, an annual work plan will be submitted at least 30 days prior to 
the beginning of the next U.S. fiscal year (i.e. by September 1). 

 

2. M&E Plan. A detailed M&E Plan will be submitted within 90 days of award. The M & E will 
cover the entire period of the Agreement and will be revised as needed, and in cases of a 
program modification including the additional of activities under the opportunity modules 

 

3. Quarterly and Annual Results Reports. 

 


Quarterly Reports: The recipient shall submit quarterly results reports describing performance 
and results achieved. Quarterly narrative reports should generally not exceed 20 pages, excluding 
Annexes, and must be submitted within 30 days of the end of each U.S. Government fiscal 
quarter. 

 

Annual Report: The annual results report should cover the period of October 1 through 
September 30th, or any part thereof in which the project was active, and must be submitted 
within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year. 

 

4. Final Report 

 

The recipient must submit a final life-of-project report not later than 90 days after the award end 
date. The final report shall meet the requirements set forth in 2 CFR 200. It shall cover the entire 
period of the award and include the cumulative results achieved, an assessment of the impact of 
the program, lessons learned and recommendations, notable impacts, and detailed financial 
information. It should be grounded in evidence and data. 

 

F.4 Program Income 

 

Program Income earned under this resultant award will be added to the Total Estimated Amount 
(exclusive of cost share) in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307(e)(2). 

 

F.5 Environmental Compliance 

 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 
sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development programs. 
This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 (http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ADS/200), 
which, in part, require that the potential environmental impacts of USAID-financed activities are 
identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that appropriate environmental safeguards are 
adopted for all activities. Recipient environmental compliance obligations under these 
regulations and procedures are specified in the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 

otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and USAID 

regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under this CA will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 

determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented in a 

Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or 

Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). 

(Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental 

documentation.”). 

 


An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) LAC-IEE-20-49 (Annex 4) has been approved for 
Honduras IPE activity, which covers activities expected to be implemented under this agreement. 
USAID has determined that these do not have an effect on the natural or physical environment. 

 

F.6 Other Requirements 

 

F.6.1 Terrorism Risk Assessment 

USAID/Honduras’s 2021 Risk Based Assessment for Terrorist Financing (RBA), which 
considers the terrorism threat environment in Honduras and is intended to reduce the risk of 
USAID assistance benefitting terrorist groups, their members, or their supporters, was approved 
by the USAID’s Office of Security on August 3, 2021. The RBA covers this Activity. 

SPECIAL PROVISIONS – REQUIRED 

 

F.6.2 Climate Risk Screening 

 

Climate change is having and will continue to have far-reaching impacts on human health, 
agriculture, urban development, and other sectors for decades to come. By assessing and 
addressing climate risk, USAID can increase the sustainability and impact of its investments. 
Climate-resilient development will deliver better, more sustainable project results in the 
countries where we work, save taxpayers’ money, and safeguard our investments. 

If USAID/Honduras identifies that this activity has moderate or high climate risk, there will be a 
need to do further assessment and build climate resilience into the activity. The Recipient] may 
be asked to carry-out this assessment following USAID guidelines and guidance from the 
Mission Environmental Officer. Relevant findings from this assessment shall be incorporated 
into the activity as inputs to the work plan. 

 

F.6.3 Interface with USAID/Honduras’ Third-Party Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 
Activity 

 

USAID/Honduras Program Office manages the Monitoring and Evaluation Support for 
Collaborative Learning and Adapting (MESCLA) activity, implemented by DEXIS. This 
Activity provides technical support to the Mission’s multi-level monitoring, evaluation, and 
learning needs. With support from this Activity, USAID is designing a structured and ambitious 
learning agenda to allow the Mission to gather and analyze evidence that will help improve inter 
and intra-Mission learning, as well as improve management and design of interventions at the 
activity and project level in order to achieve the intended results. 

Under the direction of USAID/Honduras personnel, Recipients are required to cooperate and 
allow MESCLA access to activity documentation, planning, monitoring, and other related 
documents for the purposes of evaluation and learning. MESCLA’s third-party monitoring and 
evaluation will not substitute nor supersede the Recipients’ obligations regarding activity 
implementation, monitoring, evaluation, learning, and reporting to USAID/Honduras officials, as 


(1) “Dataset” is an organized collection of structured data, including data contained in 
spreadsheets, whether presented in tabular or non-tabular form. For example, a Dataset 
may represent a single spreadsheet, an extensible mark-up language (XML) file, a 
geospatial data file, or an organized collection of these. This requirement does not apply 
to aggregated performance reporting data that the applicant submits directly to a USAID 
portfolio management system or to unstructured data, such as email messages, PDF files, 
PowerPoint presentations, word processing documents, photos and graphic images, 
audio files, collaboration software, and instant messages. Neither does the requirement 
apply to the applicant’s information that is incidental to award administration, such as 
financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management information. Datasets 
submitted to the DDL will generally be those generated with USAID resources and 
created in support of Intellectual Work that is uploaded to the Development Experience 
Clearinghouse (DEC) (see AIDAR 752.7005 “Submission Requirements for 
Development Experience Documents”). 
(2) “Intellectual Work” includes all works that document the implementation, monitoring, 
evaluation, and results of international development assistance activities developed or 
acquired under this award, which may include program and communications materials, 
evaluations and assessments, information products, research and technical reports, 
progress and performance reports required under this award (excluding administrative 
financial information), and other reports, articles and papers prepared by the applicant 
under the award, whether published or not. The term does not include the applicant’s 
information that is incidental to award administration, such as financial, administrative, 
cost or pricing, or management information. 








appropriate. The Recipient] must interface effectively with MESCLA to provide operational and 
technical support for project level evaluation and learning, and activity level monitoring and 
evaluation without superseding the Recipients’ responsibilities under this activity award. 

 

F.6.4 Submissions of Datasets to the Development Data Library (DDL) 

 

 (a) Definitions. For the purpose of submissions to the DDL: 

 

 

(b) Submissions to the Development Data Library (DDL) 

The Recipient must submit to the Development Data Library (DDL), at 

www.usaid.gov/data, in a machine-readable, non-proprietary format, a copy of any Dataset 
created or obtained in performance of this award, including Datasets produced by a subrecipient 
at any tier. The submission must include supporting documentation describing the Dataset, such 
as code books, data dictionaries, data gathering tools, notes on data quality, and explanations of 
redactions. 

Unless otherwise directed by the Agreement Officer (AO) or the Agreement Officer 
Representative (AOR), the Recipient must submit the Dataset and supporting documentation 


within thirty (30) calendar days after the Dataset is first used to produce an Intellectual Work or 
is of sufficient quality to produce an Intellectual Work. Within thirty (30) calendar days after 
award completion, the Recipient must submit to the DDL any Datasets and supporting 
documentation that have not previously been submitted to the DDL, along with an index of all 
Datasets and Intellectual Work created or obtained under the award. The Recipient must also 
provide to the AOR an itemized list of any and all DDL submissions. 

The Recipient is not required to submit the data to the DDL, when, in accordance with the terms 
and conditions of this award, Datasets containing results of federally funded scientific research 
are submitted to a publicly accessible research database. However, the Recipient must submit a 
notice to the DDL by following the instructions at www.usaid.gov/data, with a copy to the AOR, 
providing details on where and how to access the data. The direct results of federally funded 
scientific research must be reported no later than when the data are ready to be submitted to a 
peer-reviewed journal for publication, or no later than five calendar days prior to the conclusion 
of the award, whichever occurs earlier. 

The Recipient must submit the Datasets following the submission instructions and acceptable 
formats found at www.usaid.gov/data. 

The Recipient must ensure that any Dataset submitted to the DDL does not contain any 
proprietary or personally identifiable information, such as social security numbers, home 
addresses, and dates of birth. Such information must be removed prior to submission. The 
Recipient must not submit classified data to the DDL. 

F.6.5 Private Public Partnerships 

 

The success of USAID/Honduras’ Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) relies on 
strong partnerships, which are key to ensuring that development solutions can be sustained in the 
long-term by local stakeholders and markets. Private sector engagement is crucial to the success 
of this proposed activity because (describe how private sector involvement will contribute to 
Activity objectives). The private sector refers to businesses, entrepreneurs, investors, business 
associations, chambers of commerce, private grant-making foundations and philanthropic 
entities. 

The goal of private sector engagement, including but not limited to public private partnerships, is 
to help solve a development challenge and/or to further advance development objectives by 
leveraging and applying private sector expertise, capabilities, networks and other resources. The 
latter includes, but is not limited to, business expertise, market access, networks, financial 
resources and in-kind contributions such as equipment, technology or personnel time. 

USAID/Honduras has a Mission Alliance Builder and Public Private Partnerships Working 
Group (WG). The WG is in the process of developing relationships with locally based companies 
that have the potential to contribute to USAID/Honduras’ CDCS development objectives. As 


such, the Awardee will be expected to submit its private sector engagement plan to the AOR 
prior to formalizing any partnerships. 

Given the importance of private sector engagement, including public-private partnerships, 
USAID/Honduras has developed guidance for Implementing Partners (IPs) on due diligence and 
steps to take prior to engaging a private sector entity as a partner. The objective of this guidance 
is to assist USAID IPs in weighing the benefits and risks associated with partnering with a 
private sector entity to support an informed decision. The Awardee will be expected to plan and 
budget for due diligence procedures, and the Chief of Party/Director of the Activity will be 
required to document the analysis of the due diligence in a memorandum that will require AOR 
concurrence. IPs will be expected to adhere to the due diligence guidance. 

USAID/Honduras tracks public private partnerships under its Performance Monitoring Plan. This 
information is included in the public USAID Partnerships Database. The Awardee will be 
expected to report all leveraging under public private partnerships using a format to be provided 
by USAID/Honduras. 

F.6.6 Survey Datasets 

 

The Recipient shall submit raw data collected through the activity monitoring and evaluation 
process in an appropriate format to USAID/Honduras. USAID/Honduras will retain ownership of 
the survey and all datasets developed. The Recipient must follow the standard and ethical 
practices of the American Association for Public Opinion Research 
(http://www.aapor.org/Standards-Ethics.aspx) in developing and conducting survey work. The 
Recipient must also comply with USAID’s Human Subject Protection Policy and other survey 
relevant policies, including those of the GOH, as applicable. Safeguarding the rights and welfare 
of human subjects involved in the survey research supported by USAID is the responsibility of 
the Recipient]. USAID has adopted the Common Federal Policy for the Protection of Human 
Subjects, Part 225 of Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations (the "Policy"): 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1864/303maa.pdf 

 

F.6.7 Geographic Data and Cartographic Product Reporting Requirement 

 

Throughout data collection (where practical and economical) for both, context and performance 
indicators, the Recipient must include geographic information. USAID/Honduras has a dedicated 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Specialist who will develop a GIS database. The GIS 
database could support geographic mapping and representation of geocoded performance 
information in MESCLA’s performance system. The Recipient must support this GIS function 
by working with the specialist and implementing partners to ensure that relevant performance 
information is geocoded. Once the Recipient, USAID, and implementing partners agree on 
which indicators can be geocoded, USAID will require implementing partners to include this 
additional information in their regular reporting processes. The awardee should plan and budget 
to comply with GIS requirements. Further GIS details will be provided post-award. 


When Geographic Data is acquired through data use or ownership agreements with the host-
country government or other entity, the Applicant must ensure that the agreement makes it 
permissible for the Geographic Data to be submitted to, and used by, USAID. 

A. Standards 

I. Geographic Data: 

a. Geographic Data must be submitted in industry standard formats such as Shapefile (.shp) 
or GeoTIFF, or in a File Geodatabase. 

b. Geographic Data submitted shall include metadata following the XML schema, ISO 
19139, which was developed to provide a consistent manner for presenting the ISO 19115 
standard. 

c. Geographic Data must be projected to the Geographic Coordinate System World 
Geodetic System 1984 (GCS WGS 1984). All data must use the World Geodetic System 1984 
(WGS 1984) datum. 

a. Cartographic products shall be submitted in Adobe PDF format. 

b. Cartographic products generated using GIS technology shall be submitted in the industry 
standard formats of an Esri Map Document (.mxd) or Quantum GIS Project (.qgs). Use of any 
other format requires the express written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

B. Definitions 

I. Activity Location Data 

The Recipient must submit Activity Location Data which indicates the geographic location or 
locations where an activity is implemented. Activity Location Data shall be compiled and 
submitted electronically in Microsoft Excel format using the USAID/Mission Activity Location 
Template (attached, Section J). If Activity Location Data exists in a Geographic Information 
System (GIS) data format, it shall be submitted in accordance with the Geographic Data 
formatting requirements outlined above in addition to the USAID/Mission Activity Location 
Template. Activity Location Data shall be submitted as part of the second (2nd) and fourth (4th) 
quarterly reports. 

II. Geographic Data 

The Applicant shall submit Geographic Data that is acquired or created from an analysis during 
the implementation of the activity. Geographic Data that is acquired during the process of 
implementing an activity refers to geographically-referenced data such as demographic and 
health indicators, infrastructure, and land use land cover that is obtained by the Applicant during 
the implementation of the activity. Geographic Data that is created during the process of 


implementing an activity refers to geographically-referenced data that is generated as the result 
of an analysis, survey, or by any other means by the Applicant. This includes geographically 
explicit indicators included in the PMEP. Geographic Data shall be submitted to the COR 
digitally or on a DVD or an external hard drive, as a part of annual reports. 

III. Cartographic Products 

Cartographic Products refer to maps or geographic data visualizations that are generated using 
Activity Location Data or Geographic Data during the implementation of an activity. All 
Cartographic Products must be clearly labeled with the source of the data and a legend that 
defines the symbols used. When submitting cartographic products in industry standard formats 
such as an Esri Map Document (.mxd) or Quantum GIS Project (.qgs), all data contained in the 
.mxd or .qgs must be also be submitted according to the Geographic Data standards specified 
above. Cartographic Products shall be submitted as part of annual reports. 

 

SPECIAL PROVISIONS – REQUIRED WITH CONDITIONS 

 

F.6.8 Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 

 

The Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) plan shall guide key activities, indicators of 
achievement, and the associated annual and life-of-activity targets. This plan shall be developed 
by the Recipient and reviewed and approved by the AOR. The Recipient shall submit a final 
MEL plan no later than 90 calendar days after award. It is expected that the Recipient will 
mobilize within 30 days after award. The final MEL plan shall be incorporated into the award 
by reference. 

Performance monitoring must take into account the requirements for two levels of reporting: (1) 
the selection of indicators consistent with USAID/Honduras’ strategic reporting requirements as 
well as USAID’s Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators; and (2) the selection of indicators for 
internal, activity-level management. While the Recipient may suggest more relevant indicators 
to better illustrate progress and outcomes of the Activity, the AOR will make final indicator 
selection upon the review and approval of the MEL plan. These indicators will take into account 
the results and performance requirements outlined in Section C. All people-level indicators 
must be sex disaggregated. At a minimum, the indicators outlined in Section C must be included 
in the MEL Plan. Standard Foreign Assistance Indicators must be listed with their standard 
indicator numbers. Within the MEL Plan, the Recipient is also encouraged to propose research 
studies, evaluations, assessments, and other learning activities that are relevant to the overall 
goals and objectives of this Activity. 

The Recipient shall also include the following "integration" indicator in the MEL plan: 

● Percentage of interventions implemented in coordination with other USAID/Honduras 
activities. 


Further, the USAID Evaluation Policy defines evaluation as the systematic collection and 
analysis of information about the characteristics and outcome of programs and projects to 


improve effectiveness and/or inform decisions about current and future programming. The 
Recipient may be expected to include specific evaluation activities throughout the life of the 
Activity. These could include performance or impact evaluations. For all external evaluations, 
the Recipient]is expected to cooperate fully with the evaluators. 

F.6.9 Collaboration, Learning, and Adapting 

The Recipient is expected to contribute to USAID/Honduras’ commitment to a multi-faceted 
Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) approach to development. The CLA approach is 
based on the understanding that development efforts yield more effective results if they are 
coordinated and collaborative, test promising, new approaches in a continuous manner, and seek 
to generate improvements and efficiencies in programming. Further, CLA stresses the 
importance of building on what works and eliminating what does not. To support CLA efforts in 
creating conditions that foster broader development success, the Recipient is expected to 
promote: 

● Collaboration: Facilitating collaboration both within and outside USAID. This 
collaboration includes that with other USAID Activities, with the Government of 
Honduras, local actors and other groups operating in the same sector, municipality, or 
region. This may involve enhancing existing stakeholder engagement in learning and 
coordinating with other USG- or other donor activities to ensure complementarity, while 
also facilitating information sharing and the strengthening of knowledge networks. 
● Learning: Integrating new learning, innovations, and performance information back into 
the Activity to inform program management, design, USG-GOH policy dialogue 
opportunities, and funding allocations. This is achieved by creating regular pauses within 
the Activity implementation plan wherein stakeholders and partners reflect on progress 
and lessons learned to date. Further, by conducting an analytical review of existing and/or 
new evidence that may inform the Activity’s implementation. Learning activities relevant 
to the overall goals and objectives of this Activity will be reviewed and approved by the 
AOR. 
● Adapting: Translating learning from implementation experience or external sources into 
strategic and programmatic adjustments, considering changing conditions and emerging 
risks and game changers. This is achieved by adjusting work plans, interventions, and 
management structures and operational approaches to account for contextual shifts or 
tacit learning from a team’s experience, while explicitly sharing a clear, well-articulated 
rationale for adjustments along the way. Changes to the work plans and interventions, 
and allowable changes to management structures and operational approaches, will be 
reviewed and approved by the AOR. 


It is also understood that CLA takes into account programmatic learning and shifts generated by 
the Activity (outward-generating) as well as those adopted by the Recipient from external 
learning sources. 

F.6.10 Reducing Irregular Migration 

 

The United States Government, including USAID, has prioritized efforts to reduce irregular 


migration to the United States. Specifically, USAID seeks to mitigate its drivers and maximize 
the potential to reintegrate returned migrants. As a result, each Applicant for a USAID/Honduras 
Activity is required to include a discussion of how a final award would affect irregular migration 
and/or the reintegration of returnees. 

The Applicant must also discuss adherence to Do No Harm principles that can ensure an Activity 
would not inadvertently create perverse incentives for irregular migration, dangers to returnees 
or obstacles to their reintegration. 

F.6.11 Youth Programming and Development 

Given the key roles youth ages 10-29 play in Honduran society, the challenges they face, and 
that 75 percent of Honduran migrants at the U.S. Southwest border between 2013 and 2019 were 
under age 30, USAID has increased efforts to effectively engage youth as partners. USAID is 
pursuing more responsive, innovative, and cost-effective approaches for empowering youth to 
contribute to and benefit from their country’s development. 

In response to Agency requirements and to increase the effectiveness of the Activity, the 
Applicant, following Positive Youth Development principles established in the USAID Youth in 
Development Policy, must incorporate in the application clear and practical approaches to 
involve youth and address the challenges they face to accomplish the Activity’s results. The 
Applicant must describe its specific experience implementing, and monitoring sector-specific 
and cross-sectoral youth programs in diverse settings, including conflict-affected areas, as well 
as include illustrative youth indicators to measure the Activity goals. 

F.6.12 Anti-Corruption and Transparency 

The United States Government, including USAID, has prioritized and increased its focus on 
integrating anti-corruption and transparency efforts across its interventions. As defined in 
USAID Honduras’s Country Development Cooperation Strategy, anti-corruption efforts are 
paramount to effecting positive change across its Development Objectives. Given the endemic 
levels of corruption in Honduras, the Applicant must incorporate in the application clear, 
practical, and measurable approaches to promote anti-corruption, access to information, and 
transparency principles and initiatives in the sectors where interventions are planned. To prevent 
or mitigate inherent risks in doing business in Honduras, as applicable, the Applicant must 
describe in its application the preventive measures to be applied to reduce the risk that USAID 
resources inadvertently contribute to corruption, its supporters, financiers, or affiliates. 

To the extent possible and as appropriate the Applicant should include at least one illustrative 
indicator that measures advancement of anti-corruption and transparency efforts. 

F.6.13 Geographic Approach 

To achieve the goal and results set forth in USAID/Honduras’s Country Development 


Cooperation Strategy (CDCS), the Mission has defined geographic zones of influence to guide 
its programming and strategic implementation. The purpose of the zones of influence is to create 
synergies and promote integration across activities and portfolios, fostering an environment 
conducive to results achievement and reduced irregular migration and its drivers as articulated in 
the Development Objectives. 

As a data-driven Mission, USAID/Honduras incorporates evidence-based data to define the 
geographies that meet the basic conditions to achieve its CDCS goal and Development 
Objectives. A robust spectrum of dimensions are considered in this analysis, including: irregular 
migration trends, USAID historic intervention, citizen security metrics, youth demographics, 
gender based violence indicators, poverty and unsatisfied needs, existing judicial and security 
structures that provide access to justice, economic conditions, education metrics, COVID-19 
pandemic, and patterns of land use and production potential. The final list of municipalities 
within the defined zones of influence where the Activity will focus its implementation will be 
reviewed and approved by the Mission. 

While the Applicant may suggest the expansion to other municipalities that meet 
USAID/Honduras’ geo targeting criteria and improve the Activity’s progress and outcomes, the 
Mission will make the final selection. 

F.6.14 Title to Property 

Property title under the resulting agreement, except for motor vehicles, shall vest with the 
recipient in accordance with the requirements of 2 CFR 200.310 - 200.316. Title to motor 
vehicles shall be vested in the USG (2 CFR 200.313) until changes in the corresponding GoH 
Resolution/Document state otherwise. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F – FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION] 

 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 


 

Agreement Officer: 

 

Nathan Olah 

USAID/Honduras 

Office of Acquisition and Assistance 

Ave. La Paz 

Tegucigalpa, Honduras 

Email: nolah@usaid.gov 

 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

 

Anne L. Busaka 

USAID/Honduras 

Office of Acquisition and Assistance 

Ave. La Paz 

Tegucigalpa, Honduras 

Email: abusaka@usaid.gov 

 

Agreement Officer’s Representative: To be Determined (TBD) 

 

Questions to this NOFO should be sent to the following Email address: oaahonduras@usaid.gov 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 


 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in 
USAID’s acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G – FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT] 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an 
award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H – OTHER INFORMATION] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Line Item 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

Year 5 

Total 
Amount 

(USD) 

Salaries and Allowances 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Travel and Transportation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Procurement or Rental of 
Goods (Equipment and 
Supplies) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sub-awards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other Direct Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indirect Charges (if any) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sub-Total 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cost Share 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

 


ANNEX 3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

ACRONYMS 

 

ADS Automated Directive System 

 

AOR Agreement Officer’s Representative 

 

CARSI Central America Regional Security Initiative 

 

CDCS Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

 

CLA Collaboration, Learning and Adapting 

 

CoP Chief of Party 

 

CRS Catholic Relief Services 

 

CSO Civil Society Organization 

 

DO Development Objective 

 

DQA Data Quality Assessment 

 

GNP Gross National Product 

 

INE Instituto Nacional de Estadística (National Statistics Institute) 

 

IP Implementing Partner 

 

IPE Improving Pathways to Education 

 

LAPOP Latin American Public Opinion Project 

 

MELP Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 

 

MESCLA Monitoring & Evaluation Support for Collaborative Learning and Adapting 

 

MOE Ministry of Education 

NGO Non-gubernamental Organizations 

NRC Norwegian Refugee Council 

PD Program Description 

PTA Parent Teacher Association 


SEDUC Secretaria de Educación 

SEL Social and Emotional Learning 

UDL Universal Design for Learning 

UNICEF United Nations Children Fund 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

USG United States Government 

ToC Theory of Change 

WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 

 

 


 


 

ANNEX 4 - INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION 

 

See attachment – LAC-IEE-20-49 

 

 


