 

Lockup_Azerbaijan 


ISSUANCE DATE: APRIL 21, 2021 

 

DEADLINE FOR RECEIPT APRIL 30, 2021 

OF QUESTIONS: 

 10:00 HOURS LOCAL BAKU TIME 

 

CLOSING DATE AND TIME FOR MAY 26, 2021 

SUBMISSION OF APPLICATIONS: 

10:00 HOURS LOCAL BAKU TIME 

 

 

 SUBJECT: NOTICE OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITY (NOFO) NUMBER: 
72011221RFA00001 

 

ACTIVITY TITLE: SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SUPPORT (SES) ACTIVITY 

 

 

Dear Prospective Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
Cooperative Agreement for funding to support a program entitled “Social Engagement Support 
(SES) Activity” in Azerbaijan. The authority for the NOFO is found in the Foreign Assistance 
Act of 1961, as amended. Please refer to the Program Description for a complete statement of 
goals and expected results. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this 
funding opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this 
NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application submission 
requirements and selection process. 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion 
processes. 


If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be 
furnished to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to 
www.grants.gov. 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are 
submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s 
expense. 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

 

Robert Claussen 

Director, Regional Agreement Officer 

USAID/Caucasus 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 3 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 15 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 17 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 18 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 31 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 34 
SECTION G: OTHER INFORMATION 39 
ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 40 
ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 41 
ANNEX 3 - RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION STRATEGY 44 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

 

SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SUPPORT (SES) ACTIVITY1 

1 SES in Azerbaijani means “voice”. Hidden meaning of the project`s abbreviation would mean “raising the voice”. 
The program will build on the accomplishments of the USAID-funded SEDA that assisted 172 communities in 6 
economic regions of Azerbaijan to increase citizen participation in addressing socio-economic needs. 

2 https://www.usaid.gov/azerbaijan/cdcs 

 

Purpose: 

USAID seeks to empower citizens, citizen groups, and civil society to engage with one another 
and the government with the aim of building trust, confidence, skills, and abilities. We also seek 
civil society and citizen engagement of the private sector to catalyze their advocacy for changes 
that lead to good governance associated reforms. The purpose of this activity is to strengthen 
local partnerships to enhance citizen participation in advancing Azerbaijan’s social and 
economic development while also increasing accountability and transparency in governance. 

We will pilot the use of political economy analysis (PEA) both periodically and to set baselines. 
PEAs will contribute to the selection of target geographies (communities and governance units) 
with the political will, resources, and potential for successful partnerships that also line up with 
the Mission’s strategic objectives as outlined in the USAID/Azerbaijan Country Development 
and Cooperation Strategy.2 

Background: 

The evolving political landscape in Azerbaijan presents opportunities that allow for addressing 
public participation, accountability, economic governance and improved service delivery, 
particularly through civil society, citizen participation, and more responsive governance. USAID 
acknowledges that activities must proceed carefully in order to build trust and incrementally 
open the space wider for increased partnership with special consideration for context and 
security concerns. The Government of Azerbaijan’s reform agenda and appealing to the 
government’s own incentives (when these line up with citizens’ needs) may pose opportunities. 
USAID seeks to provide safe spaces for civic engagement and the acquisition and practical 
application of skills related to civic engagement for citizens, citizens groups, media, the private 
sector, and activists whenever possible. USAID recognizes the private sector as partners of civil 
society in the endeavor for better, more responsive governance and more government 
accountability, especially for market-oriented reforms. USAID prioritizes promoting gender 
equality, in particular, increasing the representation and participation of women and youth, 
including young women, in its strategic approach. Women are mostly excluded from community 


decision-making and lack authoritative voices in government while suffering disproportionately 
from gaps in critical needs as well as intersecting forms of discrimination. 

An engaged citizenry including a vibrant civil society is pivotal for the development of any 
democratic society. Since 2014, the situation in the country with civil society worsened as a 
result of changes to numerous laws related to NGO activities and NGO/grant/donor registration 
requirements. Shrinking space for civil society organizations makes it vital to continue efforts to 
support their voices and bring back their influence while encouraging and capacitating the 
engagement of Azerbaijan’s citizens. Despite all of the challenges in the operating environment, 
civil society and citizens are already enacting some incremental positive changes for the benefit 
of vulnerable citizens/communities, contributing to socio-economic development of the country, 
and improving governance practices at the local and regional level. 

Informal citizen initiatives, organizations like Community Development Councils (CDCs), are 
important players in supporting Azerbaijan's democratic evolution, sustainability and resilience, 
particularly at the local level. They should be provided the same rights and opportunities as 
formal CSOs and be empowered to lead local level initiatives. These efforts will support 
Azerbaijan’s democratic evolution, stability and resilience. USAID seeks to amplify and inspire 
even more of this. 

This new activity is a follow-on to a ten-year long investment in rural Azerbaijan, the Socio-
Economic Development Activity (SEDA). SEDA was designed to enhance citizen participation 
in decision-making processes and in implementation of socio-economic development initiatives 
at the community level. The Activity contributed to increased engagement between 
executive/municipal authorities and citizen groups (CDCs), by building a platform for dialogue, 
cooperation and collaboration. The efforts led to mobilization of more than 170 communities 
across Azerbaijan. These efforts were an attempt to bring the voice of the general public into the 
decision-making processes on socio-economic issues at the grass-roots level. Despite a strong 
centralized government, the SEDA activity found the government open for some types of 
engagement with citizen groups, namely the CDCs. USAID and civil society organizations and 
groups active in Azerbaijan are finding more opportunities for wider engagement between 
citizens and government, as well as the private sector and other institutions. A SEDA final 
evaluation detected, among other things, the importance of developing a gender and youth 
strategy, outlining opportunities and approaches in these areas. The strategy should cover both 
organizational and programmatic aspects, undertaking a thorough analysis of barriers and 
opportunities for greater participation of women and youth in all civic engagements, including 
with CDCs, and reorienting themselves to advocate and lead by example.3 The SEDA evaluation 
also made observations about activities and their link to democracy and governance as well as 
suggestions for how to contribute to further growth of citizens along the democratic participation 
spectrum that are worth noting. Applicants are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the 
evaluation document, the link to which is available in the annex. 

3 SEDA Final Evaluation (Outcome Harvesting), p.12 

SES is designed to further expand and solidify those opportunities, identify new ones, and 
innovate towards deeper, lasting results. This activity is also intended to benefit from 
collaboration with an ongoing activity, the Empowering Civil Society for Transparency 


(ECSOFT), which has conducted assessments and lessons learned in the sphere of good 
governance. Select documents prepared by ECSOFT can be shared upon request. A list of those 
and other documents the Mission has found useful in designing this Project Description, 
including an evaluation of SEDA, is available in the annex. 

 ---


Objectives and Theory of Change: 

This activity’s goal is to strengthen formal and informal citizen groups (community-based 
organizations), and support and enhance their role in advancing Azerbaijan’s social and 
economic development while introducing innovative participatory practices at the local and 
regional levels. The theory of change is that if citizens and citizens’ groups are strengthened and 
supported to more effectively engage their government; and if opportunities for engagement 
between government, citizens, and the private sector are increased; then citizens can better 
contribute to the socio-economic development of their communities and improve governance in 
their areas of influence. 

Objective 1: Improved capacity of citizens and groups to sustain engagement with 
government on shared development initiatives 

Sub-objectives: 

1. Enhanced civic engagement by citizens’ groups, informal and formal, including but not 
limited to CDCs; 
2. Diversified partnerships for citizens’ groups across private and public sectors. 


 

Building from previous investments in democracy, rights, and governance programming, this 
objective focuses on building civic agency.4 Activities under this objective will build or 
strengthen the capacities of citizens and citizen groups to work collaboratively to address shared 
challenges, find solutions to problems, and create common ground. A particular focus will be on 
increasing womens’ roles in developing local solutions. USAID envisions capacitation of 
citizens to work with fellow citizens in informal groups, with formal CSOs, associations, private 
sector entities, and government agencies in the pursuit of demand-driven and shared 
development initiatives. These initiatives may include seeking solutions to service delivery 
problems including issues pertaining to water and sanitation in rural areas, support to micro-
enterprises for rural livelihoods, access to early childhood education/childcare to increase 
women’s participation in the activity and the labor market, to name a few. The SES activity will 
reduce barriers and increase the civic agency and capacity of women and youth to better 
advocate, particularly collectively, and ensure their issues are represented in decision-making 
processes. The activity will also engage men and boys in ensuring gender equality in access to 
those services. Women and youth are key demographics and critical stakeholders in this activity. 

4 There are many definitions and permutations of civic agency. For the purposes of this design, USAID sees building 
civic agency as building the capacity of citizens to act cooperatively on solutions to common problems, across 
differences of view, by developing or enhancing habits and practices, norms and ways of life that support their 
ability to collectively act. 


USAID envisions a technical approach that will engage the government at any level, but is 
primarily focused at the regional and local levels, with clear strategies for how to carry that 
engagement up to central level influencers and decision makers wherever and whenever possible 
and appropriate. Engagement will be most successful where the government is open to 
partnership or the PEA(s) suggest engagement could be catalytic for concrete change or reform. 

 ---


Objective 2:Increased utilization of participatory governance practices for local 
development especially through identification of partnership opportunities with the 
Government 

Sub-objectives: 

1. Increased opportunities for engagement between government, citizens, and the private 
sector 
2. Improved responsive participation practices/mechanisms; and 
3. Enhanced feedback to citizen input. 


 

Critical to this objective is that feedback and suggestions received through public participation 
and social accountability have an effect on the practices of Azerbaijan’s institutions and do not 
become mere tokenism. PEAs can support identification of issues, localities, and other 
opportunities that could breed success, however incremental, rather than citizen frustration. 
Stemming from the 2014 Law on Public Participation, GoAZ entities have the responsibility to 
generate effective acceptance of citizen participation in practices and policies, transforming 
citizen contributions into valuable input that supports the oversight role of citizens and citizen 
groups. One such effort in this vein are the Public Councils. However, implementation by such 
entities does not have deep roots, or experience, and feedback loops are weak with little 
accountability built in. Contributions from participation efforts under this Objective should both 
build on existing entities and potentially develop new ones. This should also translate into 
improvements in public financial management and specifically in transparency and efficiency in 
the use of resources and public budgets, and this effect should be communicated back to those 
citizens and groups. 

 ---


Key Considerations 

USAID is interested in exploring the following approaches under Objectives 1 and 2 and 
welcomes applications that include thought as to how any, all, or none of these could bear fruit 
as pilots or otherwise be included: 

- Social entrepreneurship - ideas range from promoting citizen-government partnerships 
(eg. Community Pitch Competitions) that seek to specifically engage women and youth to 
promote the building successful businesses owned by the community, or via investments made 
through CDCs, that allow local communities to develop the resources they need to address their 
own needs. Social entrepreneurship pilot activities could complement and strengthen the role of 
the local community in engaging with locally-based government structures by allowing and 
empowering communities to bring their own resources to the table. Illustrative examples: 
piloting community foundation models, formation of joint citizen-government regional 


development entities. Pilot activities may also include advocacy for additional regulations or 
legal framework to support social entrepreneurship. 

- Public Private Partnerships (PPPs)- such partnerships are a way for the strengths of the 
private and public sectors to complement each other. Citizens, the private sector, and government 
can come together in the identification of priority problems, proposed solutions, and pursuit of 
PPPs and as such, USAID is interested in opportunities to partner with the private sector to 
jointly design, fund, and implement solutions to social and economic problems in Azerbaijan. 

- Participatory Budgeting - For our purposes we define participatory budgeting as the 
process through which citizens influence and monitor how real budget funds are spent. While 
this is challenging in a context like Azerbaijan, participatory budgeting can encourage 
participation, particularly among young people. Building on SEDA and other interactions with 
locally-based governance entities, there are some localities where this could be piloted with the 
potential for creating a demonstration effect. Citizens will be also able to explore introducing 
gender responsive budgeting. USAID has already received interest in better understanding 
participatory budgeting from some local and central government officials. 

- Other Citizen Watchdog/Oversight Functions, particularly related to service delivery such 
as citizen scorecards. Again, like with participatory budgeting, activities would need to be 
piloted in localities that offer the opportunity for this level of participation and engagement 
between citizens and their government. 

- Partnerships with GoAZ agencies to better meet the needs of citizens, and with whom 
USAID has successfully partnered in the past, such as ASAN Xidmet, Small and Medium 
Business Development Agency, ABAD, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Labor and Social 
Protection, Committee on Family, Women and Children Affairs. ASAN in particular, has a vast 
network of youth volunteers throughout Azerbaijan, many of whom are young women. Past 
USAID programming, the Women’s Participation Program implemented by Counterpart 
International, piloted promising partnerships with ASAN Xidmet, as have other USAID and 
USG activities. 

 ---


Objective 3: Rapid Response to Unforeseen Opportunities and Challenges 

In parallel to all other efforts, supporting a more capable and engaged civil society and local 
government to form productive partnerships that support social and economic development may 
necessitate additional shorter-term activities. The Rapid Response implementation mechanism 
(RRIM) is meant to address unforeseen and/or unexpected opportunities and challenges in 
Azerbaijan’s dynamic operating environment which includes potential democratic backsliding or 
possible breakthroughs, post-conflict recovery needs, post-pandemic recovery needs, and 
opportunities identified through the PEAs, to name a few. All requests must contribute to 
attainment of USAID/Azerbaijan’s first Country Development Cooperation Strategy 
development objective, “Azerbaijan’s society is more capable and engaged” and the two other 
objectives in this Project Description. Grants, technical assistance, and other forms of support are 
possible, depending upon the needs, windows of opportunity, and funding availability. 


Any activities resulting from this implementation mechanism will be subject to substantial 
involvement provisions, including approval by the AOR, and will require amendments to the 
awardee’s approved Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan. Approval will be based 
on a well thought out concept as well as an accompanying budget. Either the Recipient or 
USAID may initiate an activity request under the RRIM. If the RRIM, or a portion of the RRIM, 
is not utilized as described above prior to the final year of the activity, the AOR or the Recipient 
may request that the RRIM be realigned into the standard program funding with final approval 
authority with the Agreement Officer. Not all of the RRIM must be used at one time, and 
multiple interventions can be considered. Applicants should articulate how they would structure 
work under this objective irrespective of whether or not it is funded immediately as it is possible 
that funding for rapid response is not made available with the rest of the core budget. 

 ---


Political Economy Analysis, Geographic Focus 

USAID/Azerbaijan is interested in utilizing political economy analysis (PEA) to provide USAID 
technical managers and activity implementer staff with a systematic way of optimizing the 
geographies and individuals we partner with to achieve SES’s targets. We require PEAs as part 
of the baseline assessment under SES, and would welcome discussion of utilizing periodic PEA 
throughout the life of the award. 

PEAs can take many forms, and USAID welcomes applications that suggest ways to conduct, 
structure, and use PEAs and with what periodicity, in addition to the required baseline. These 
should include but are not limited to using PEAs to map Azerbaijani change agents, as well as 
influential actors in and out of government that could either enable or impede project 
performance against stated objectives. Baseline PEA(s) must support choosing which 
communities to partner with in the geographic focus areas important to USAID/Azerbaijan - 
namely the rural north and south of the country. Since Azerbaijan is a dynamic operating 
environment, it is possible that projected use of PEAs (other than the required baseline PEA) 
may shift between proposal and implementation, or during implementation. If that is the case, 
USAID and the grantee will decide, jointly, on any adjustments to areas of operation and focus 
and adjustments will be reflected in the corresponding annual work plans. The objective of all 
activity-supported assessments, especially baseline PEAs, is to provide recommendations that 
can be translated into action plans for realistic, high-priority interventions with the potential to 
tangibly produce results under each objective of SES. Therefore, baseline PEAs should precede 
and inform the submission of the first annual work plan, at a minimum, and further PEA(s) 
should inform future interventions. USAID is open to applications outlining PEA efforts, large or 
small, that could guide implementation, accompany any pivots, or provide a lense for 
programming decision making. Applicants should include their proposed baseline and any other 
PEA methodology/methodologies and/or types of tools intended for use as the basis of their 
PEA(s). 

 

 

 


Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 

The Applicant will submit a proposed Activity level Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan 
(MEL Plan) to rigorously and credibly document the Activity’s effectiveness and to learn from 
accomplished work and results. USAID/Azerbaijan acknowledges that there could be multiple 
approaches to achieving the objectives outlined in this project description, and the specific 
indicators may vary somewhat depending upon the technical approaches proposed. It is also 
acknowledged that output indicators may be necessary for overall day-to-day management of the 
program, however, the Applicant should vest more time in developing quality outcome level 
indicators that have the ability to track overall achievements toward the goal and objectives. This 
entails identifying indicators and realistic (yet ambitious) targets that correspond to and measure 
the Activity’s interventions at different levels of results (goal, objectives, expected outcomes, 
outputs) and are linked to established baselines to assess the performance of proposed 
interventions. It may be necessary to also consider proxy indicators with the caveat that there 
may be challenges to attribution. There should be at least one gender-focused indicator included. 

The MEL Plan will elaborate the methods and assessment tools the Applicant will use for 
collecting, monitoring, analyzing, reporting and maintaining the data. The Applicant should use a 
mix of custom and standard indicators from the Standard Foreign Assistance Master Indicator 
List. All people-level indicators must be disaggregated by sex and age. The Applicant shall 
consider quality indicators over quantity when developing its list of performance indicators. The 
following are some illustrative indicators. The Applicant will provide their suggested indicators 
that align with outcomes flowing from their particular stated technical approach. 

 

- NUMBER of institutionalized citizen participation mechanisms (by government) 
- NUMBER of times citizens and groups are informed of how their participation impacted 
the government institution or process. 
- In SES-targeted provinces, PERCENTAGE of citizens understand the roles and 
responsibilities of local leaders and their options for approaching local leaders with their 
concerns and understand their responsibilities towards improved local governance 
- Azerbaijan improves its Open Budget Index score 
- increased NUMBER of public private partnerships as a result of the activity 
- increased NUMBER of social entrepreneurship enterprises or partnerships 
- NUMBER of citizens who engaged in a local decision-making process for the first time 
GNDR-2 Percentage of female participants in USG-assisted programs designed to 
increase access to productive economic resources (assets, credit, income or employment) 
- GNDR-8: Number of persons trained with USG assistance to advance outcomes 
consistent with gender equality or female empowerment through their roles in public or 
private sector institutions or organizations 
- Increased NUMBER of women-led partnerships developed as a result of the USG 
assistance 
- PERCENTAGE increase of women civic engagement with government institutions 
- PERCENTAGE improvement from baseline of government-citizen engagement 
opportunities 
- RATIO of enacted solutions proposed by communities 



- NUMBER of beneficiaries reached through USAID-provided social infrastructure 
opportunities 
- PERCENT of USG-assisted organizations with improved performance 
- PERCENTAGE of youth who participate in civic engagement activities following soft 
skills/life skills training or initiatives from USG assisted programs 


USAID/Azerbaijan would welcome applications that include the use of complexity-aware 
monitoring and evaluation methodologies. 

USAID/Azerbaijan also welcomes the inclusion of pause and reflect sessions that include 
USAID Mission staff, at key points in the activity’s annual performance implementation, 
identified by the grantee, to review progress, identify pivot points, and address challenges 
adaptively. This creates opportunities to reconfirm the assumptions from which the design is 
built and review that the theory of change is still valid or if adjustments to the approach are 
required, what those adjustments may need to be. The periodic pause and reflect workshops are 
particularly critical in this space due to the often fluid political environment. 

In addition to data collection, performance indicators, and possible pause and reflect workshops, 
the MEL Plan should identify other assessments, evaluations or learning products that may be 
used to assess the effectiveness of activities and progress towards results as well as determine the 
necessary strategy shifts. 

Operational Principles 

Gender 

 

Gender Equal opportunities for men and women to influence the governance of their country, 
have their voices heard, and needs addressed are at the heart of equitable development, social 
justice, and healthy representative democracy. Women and men have differing needs and views 
about governance, as well as distinct interests and incentives in engaging. Balanced gender 
representation and participation in local governance are closely tied to ensuring that men and 
women can exercise choices regarding political, social, and economic issues. 

There is wide agreement across the international donor community on the status of women in 
Azerbaijan and on the beneficial actions that could be undertaken to improve their economic and 
social standing. However, in order to do so will require understanding and addressing some of 
the identified challenges, which the Applicant should consider as they design the Activity. Below 
are a few challenges that USAID/Azerbaijan considers relevant and should be mitigated under 
this Activity to increase the likelihood for success. 

● Few women hold leadership or decision-making positions in the public and/or 
private sector, and men and women still have unequal decision-making power in 
the household. 
● Gender stereotypes and rigid conceptions of gender roles continue to limit choices 
men and women make about education, employment and career paths, and family 
and domestic responsibilities. They also place an outsized burden of unpaid 
domestic labor on women. 



● Gender based violence, including domestic violence and intimate partner 
violence, continues to be a serious problem in Azerbaijan. 


USAID/Azerbaijan places considerable importance to increasing government-citizen 
engagement on issues affecting gender equality. Interventions under this Activity will need to 
respond to gender considerations and ensure that the assistance and results are equitably 
beneficial to women and men. A special focus will be given to supporting women’s leadership 
and advancing more women into senior level positions, and providing opportunities for women 
leaders and women-run civil society organizations to engage with decision-makers and higher 
levels of government. Promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment should be a built-
in theme throughout the Activity reflected in interventions that recognize the differing needs, 
perspectives and approaches necessary to engage women and men meaningfully. An activity-
level gender analysis will be expected for more effective integration of gender considerations 
into those interventions. 

 

Youth 

 

Life for much of the population is like that of low-income countries in Central Asia, and they 
experience the same rural exodus pressure with a growing youth population who lack 
employment opportunities. The lack of job opportunities after high school graduation drives the 
emigration of trained and educated youth (male and female) from Azerbaijan. Many of the best 
and brightest youth are abandoning rural communities and heading to either Baku or Russia for 
work. Between the lack of job opportunities and the under-representation of their voices in local 
government, formal economy, and society, many face desperate and uncertain futures. This 
failure to invest in rural populations creates opportunities for foreign malign influence, especially 
along the borders with Russia and Iran. 

The inclusion of youth is critical for instilling greater appreciation for, understanding of, and 
sustainability of engagement in local community development and governance. To this end, the 
Activity will foster greater space for youth to network, dialogue, collaborate, and share youth-
specific trends, challenges, and opportunities for advancing youth priorities in targeted regions. 
The Activity should consider key areas where youth engagement is critical to ensure that young 
people are recognized as change agents and rights holders and are positioned to take greater 
leadership roles in the decision-making process. 

Interventions will focus on youth participation, leadership, and ensure the full involvement of 
relevant youth organizations throughout the life of Activity. The Activity will identify youth-
serving and youth-led groups to elevate their participation and involvement to facilitate 
collaboration and to promote the development of more robust and youth-friendly priorities. 
Given the heterogeneous nature of the youth demographic, there should be an adaptive and 
dynamic approach to enhancing youth engagement. The activity will identify the most effective 
ways of youth outreach, be it through traditional methods, social media or other available 
communication technologies. 


 

Private Sector Engagement 

 

USAID/Azerbaijan has eagerly embraced the principles of Private Sector Engagement (PSE) and 
has targeted selected value chain interventions that leverage corporate capabilities and that can 
bring benefits to small and medium enterprises. All sectors in Azerbaijan have a vital role to 
play, and we can also engage the private sector to address humanitarian and development issues 
in our work together. We seek to diversify the partner base to include more private enterprises 
like U.S. vendors, providers of technical assistance, financial investors, and businesses of all 
sizes from across many industries. 

Innovation and Integration of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) 

 

There is a growing need for civil society organizations to work strategically with communities, 
citizens, government and the private sector in the digital sphere to explore tools, platforms, and 
skills that will enable and strengthen citizen engagement with decision-makers and improve 
responsiveness to citizens. However, any interventions to meet this need should take into 
consideration the significant differences in the level of readiness throughout the country to take 
advantage of the opportunities that ICTs may offer. 

Although it is not required, where appropriate, the Applicant may want to consider ways in 
which to capitalize on innovative approaches and the use of ICTs to foster citizen engagement, 
increase public awareness, close gender digital divide in citizen groups, and strengthen 
transparency and accountability. This is especially important considering the recent, stunning 
impact of COVID-19 stay-at-home orders and the shift of industries, education, and development 
programming to online platforms. 

Sustainability and Legacy 

 

The Applicant’s approach to sustainability of the goals and objectives is a key consideration for 
USAID/Azerbaijan. The Activity is expected to build the institutional capacity of targeted 
communities, CSOs, and state entities, to foster partnerships, and to introduce tools and 
mechanisms in a manner that these will continue to develop beyond the timeframe and life of the 
Activity. 

 

The Activity strives to strengthen democratic institutions and processes to promote greater 
transparency, accountability, and overall responsiveness to citizens by the government. While 
full sustainability of these efforts as explicitly implemented may be too ambitious or unrealistic, 
the key to long-term success is to ensure that interventions support a process by which the ideals 
espoused under the Activity goals/objectives are internalized and take root. It is expected that 
stakeholders and communities have full buy-in of the Activity purpose and are empowered by 
the efforts initiated and/or strengthened processes to the point that the ideals will be integrated 
and specific interventions will evolve as appropriate in each community in order to continue to 
reinforce the overarching Activity purpose. To this end, the Applicant is required to integrate 
sustainability measures both in design and implementation and determine appropriate indicators 
to track progress towards sustainability as defined. 


USAID/Azerbaijan will support interventions that build on existing opportunities and support 
target entities that are committed to investing in and receiving tailored assistance to improve 
their technical, organizational, as well as partnership and alliance-building skills to engage in 
inclusive development and ensure stakeholders become more effective change agents in the long 
run. To further sustain the outcomes of this Activity and foster local ownership, interventions 
should not only focus on building and strengthening the capacity of local citizens, partner CSOs, 
and target government officials, but also fostering the motivation to utilize the new knowledge, 
skills, and the benefits of broader collaboration and coordination. 

Much of the success of reaching the overall Activity’s purpose and objectives will depend on 
building and incentivizing Azerbaijani citizens to engage with their government and seek 
solutions to priority problems. Achieving this will require visible results, which will help citizens 
to feel empowered and motivated to remain engaged. Additionally, the Applicant will be 
required to consider working with local partners to understand their legal parameters and 
maximizing the resources available to them through networking to continue and build on the 
interventions beyond the Activity. The private sector could play a role in this space. 

Collaborating, Learning and Adapting (CLA) 

 

USAID/Azerbaijan has put time and effort into building a culture of CLA into Mission 
operations. It is expected that the grantee also models a CLA culture and integrates that culture 
into internal processes and in the implementation of activities. A collaborative working 
relationship between the grantee and relevant USAID staff is required. Where applicable and 
appropriate, the grantee should collaborate with the Mission’s implementing partners, 
interagency colleagues, and/or the host country government. Specific coordination activities, in 
addition to the above, shall be identified. Activity generated products, briefings, and facilitated 
events should have a learning component integrated. In addition, all products, briefings, and 
facilitated events should focus on providing recommendations for how the Mission can use that 
data to make evidence-based decisions and adapt programming as necessary. 

 

Managing Risk 

 

Since early 2013, the government has used a range of measures to crack down on international 
and local NGOs and their activities. Notably, the government controls NGO and grant 
registration to restrict some NGOs from being able to access grant funding through financial 
institutions. Many USAID awards have come under intense scrutiny and have experienced tax 
penalties, raids that have confiscated equipment, and even criminal charges filed against 
individual staff. While the context has improved to some degree, applicants should be aware of 
these issues and have measures in place to mitigate potential risks the award may face over the 
life of performance. 

 

 

 

 


Persons with disabilities 

 

Throughout all programmatic interventions, USAID pursues inclusivity and supports meaningful 
participation for persons with disabilities in our programming and their communities. People 
with disabilities in Azerbaijan report challenges in meeting their basic needs and accessing 
services. The grantee will ensure participation of people with disabilities in the civic agency, and 
other activities under this award. It is critical that the activity creates favorable conditions under 
which persons with disabilities will be able to articulate their needs and advocate for more 
inclusive agendas and policies with the government. Applications should reflect how to empower 
organizations led by and benefitting persons with disabilities, and engage them as civil society 
and civic leaders. 

- END OF SECTION A - 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 

 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $15,000,000/00 in total USAID funding over a five (5) year period. 

 2. Expected Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 

The applicants should refer to Section A. 

 

3. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 

The period of performance anticipated herein is five years, starting from actual date to be filled 
in at the time of award, estimated on or about October 1, 2021. 

 4. Substantial Involvement 

a. The Agency’s approval of the recipient’s implementation plans during performance. 
USAID generally only requires approval of implementation plans annually; however, 
where changed contexts or new information require a pivot in the activity, USAID may 
consider changes to an implementation plan. 
b. The Agency’s review and approval of substantive provisions of proposed subawards or 
contracts (see definitions in 2 CFR 200). 
c. The Agency’s involvement in the selection of key recipient personnel. 
d. The Agency and recipient collaboration or joint participation, such as when the 
recipient’s successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 
USAID’s technical knowledge. 
e. Agency monitoring to permit specific kinds of direction or redirection of the work 
because of the interrelationships with other projects or activities. All such direction or 
redirection must be within the program description budget, and other terms and 
conditions of the award. 


5. Authorized Geographic Code 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 
937. 

 6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Social Engagement 
Support (SES) Activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 


responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. 
The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent 
with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 

 7. Selection of Instrument 

Democracy and Governance (DG) programming in Azerbaijan historically is implemented 
through assistance mechanisms. These mechanisms have proven their efficiency and 
effectiveness given the operational and political environment. This work has been done 
effectively through assistance mechanisms for the past 10 years. It is still the intention of 
USAID to create a relationship through this agreement to assist a recipient in providing its 
services to others through a transfer by USAID of Federal financial assistance to carry out a 
public purpose of support. The intent is not to purchase goods or services for USAID's benefit or 
use. Unlike acquisition mechanisms, assistance, Cooperative Agreements in particular, provides 
a needed level of flexibility, opportunity to involve domestic civil society organization, and 
better engagement with the national authorities for successful achievement of goals and 
objectives of programs and activities. Assistance awards also provide a layer of separation 
between the implementer and USAID in terms of program ownership. This is particularly 
beneficial for DG activities in order to mitigate against perceptions of U.S. government 
interference in domestic issues as the activity is owned by the implementer and not the U.S. 
government. 

 

- END OF SECTION B - 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

Each applicant must be found to be a responsible entity before receiving an award. The 
Agreement Officer (AO) may determine that a pre-award survey is required in accordance with 
ADS 303.3.9.1 to determine whether the applicant has the necessary organization, experience, 
accounting and operational controls, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to 
achieve the objectives of the program and comply with established U.S. Government standards, 
laws, and regulations. Applicants who do not currently meet all USAID requirements for systems 
and controls may still be eligible under special award considerations and should not be 
discouraged from applying. USAID welcomes applications from organizations that have not 
previously received financial assistance from USAID. The prime recipient is encouraged to 
promote involvement of “underutilized” partners and local organizations in the implementation 
of this activity. 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

USAID has established a suggested minimum recipient cost share of 3% for the award. Such 
funds may be provided directly by the recipient; other multilateral, bilateral, and foundation 
donors; host governments; and local organizations, communities and private businesses that 
contribute financially and in-kind to implementation of activities at the country level. This may 
include contribution of staff level of effort, office space or other facilities or equipment which 
may be used for the program, provided by the recipient. For guidance on cost sharing in grants 
and cooperative agreements see 2 CFR 200.306 . 

 

However, cost share is only a recommendation intended to strengthen the overall success of the 
design. Should the applicant choose to include a cost share, the methodology for calculating cost 
share and the specific percentage of cost share will be determined at the sole discretion of the 
applicant. The applicants not proposing cost share will not be disadvantaged in the selection 
process, since the cost share will not serve as an evaluation criteria for the application. 

 

 

 

- END OF SECTION C - 


 

 

 

 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 

 

Only the Agreement Officer is authorized to make commitments on behalf of USAID. The 
Agreement Officer is listed below: 

 

Mr.Robert Claussen 

Regional Agreement Officer 

USAID/Caucasus 

29 Georgian-American Friendship Ave, Tbilisi, Georgia 

rclaussen@usaid.gov 

 

The point of contact for information about this NOFO is: 

 

Ms. Kenul Salimova 

Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

USAID/Azerbaijan 

111, Azadlig avenue 

Baku, Azerbaijan 

ksalimova@usaid.gov 

 

2. Questions and Answers 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted to Ms. Kenul Salimova at 
ksalimova@usaid.gov.with a copy to Mr. Robert Claussen at rclaussen@usaid.gov no later than 
the date and time indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Any information given to a 
prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective 
applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting 
applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 3. General Content and Form of Application 

Preparation of Applications: 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 


Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

· Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 

· Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 

· Program name 

· Notice of Funding Opportunity number 

· Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303. 

 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 Applications must comply with the following: 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 
1” margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including 
consecutive page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 
12 point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 



Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 4. Application Submission Procedures 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted by email to points of contact stated in 
Section D.1 before the respective due dates and times on the cover page. Applicants must ensure 
that the applications are received at USAID/Azerbaijan in their entirety. No additions or 
modifications to submitted applications will be accepted after the closing date and time. Late 
applications will be considered only if the Agreement Officer determines it is in the 
Government’s interest. Each email submission may not exceed 15 MB in size. 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted 
as consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate 
in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the 
same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a 
"corrected" email. 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

Hard copies, whether hand delivered or by postal mail, will not be accepted. 

If you do not receive an email confirmation for receipt of applications, please contact the point of 
contact at the email address noted above. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and 
merit review criteria found in this NOFO. 

 


 

(a) Cover Page 

 (b) Table of Contents 

 Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit review 
criteria. 

 c) Executive Summary (One page) 

 The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical 
Application. 

 d) Key personnel 

The Applicant should describe technical qualifications, experience and position descriptions for 
key personnel. The Applicant should propose the staffing pattern most appropriate for its 
proposed interventions for which individuals, working under the project, are expected to possess 
adequate expertise for successful implementation. Please note that the current administration 
recently released an Executive Order to address diversity, equity and inclusion within the federal 
government. As USAID values diversity, equity and inclusion expressed in the executive order 
within its own operations, applicants are also encouraged to reflect similar values in its proposed 
staffing structure. 

Proposed Key Personnel should at the very least include the following: Chief of Party (COP), 
Deputy Chief of Party or Technical Director, Private Sector Engagement (PSE) Specialist, 
Capacity Development (CD) Specialist. 

Ideally, applications will present a team that demonstrates experience across all components. 
Applicants may propose and justify different titles for those proposed key personnel or others , 
up to a total of five, for USAID’s consideration. 

1. Chief of Party (COP) 

The COP should serve as the primary point of contact with USAID/Azerbaijan with regard to 
day-to-day implementation and management matters relating to the agreement. The COP should 
have overall responsibility for ensuring quality control, the appropriateness and overall 
responsiveness of all assistance provided under the agreement, whether by short- or long-term 
advisors, sub-grantee partners or others. This position also entails: monitoring, evaluating and 
documenting progress toward project objectives; evaluating activities through consultative 
meetings, site visits and reporting requirements; implementing solutions to keep activities on 
track; and providing overall guidance and direction focusing the activity team on achieving 
agreed targets and long-term strategic objectives. Given the additional focus on creating more 
opportunities for women and youth, experience applying a gender and youth lens in 
programming will be necessary. Minimum qualifications include: 


- 10 years of progressively responsible international development experience in project 
management in complex environments with multiple sub-grantees. 
- 7 years of progressively responsible experience in the fields of community development, 
civic education and engagement, private sector engagement, civil society capacity 
development, democratic governance, or other comparable sectors within the social 
sciences field 
- 5 years of progressively responsible experience in overseeing financial management 
operations 
- Demonstrable experience in conflict resolution 
- Bachelor's degree in relevant field; Masters degree is preferred 
- English proficiency required (oral and written) 
- References for the last three (3) years of work experience are required and will be 
verified. 


 

2. Deputy Chief of Party (DCOP) or Technical Director 

The DCOP or Technical Director should serve as the lead technical advisor to the COP 
responsible for ensuring the proposed approach/methodology will likely lead to sustainable 
programmatic success. The incumbent should also have a strong comprehension and command 
of monitoring and evaluation tools in order to utilize it to both track progress against indicators 
as well as recommend necessary changes to implementation. In this regard, experience in applied 
political economy analyses will be valuable as it will be a critical tool under this program to 
determine the targeted regions for operations and identify thematic priorities areas of focus based 
on the likelihood for success. Given the additional focus on creating more opportunities for 
women and youth, experience applying a gender and youth lens in programming will be 
necessary. Minimum qualifications include: 

- 10 years of progressively responsible experience in the fields of community development, 
civic education and engagement, private sector engagement, civil society capacity 
development, democratic governance, political economy analyses or other comparable 
sectors within the social sciences field 
- 7 years of progressively responsible experience in project management in complex 
environments with multiple sub-grantees. 
- 5 years of progressively responsible experience in managing and applying monitoring 
and evaluation tools 
- Demonstrated experience incorporating a gender and youth lens in programming 
- Bachelor's degree in relevant field; Masters degree is preferred 
- English proficiency required (oral and written) 
- Azerbaijani proficiency desirable. 
- References for the last three (3) years of work experience are required and will be 
verified. 


 


3. Private Sector Engagement (PSE) Specialist 

The PSE Specialist should serve as the lead technical advisor to the COP and DCOP/Technical 
Director with respect to identifying and establishing linkages with the private sector as outlined 
in the design framework. The incumbent should have applied knowledge on leveraging social 
entrepreneurs and local/regional/international businesses to promote greater community 
development and civic engagement, particularly as a means to address various service delivery 
challenges faced by communities. Given the additional focus on creating more opportunities for 
women and youth, experience applying a gender and youth lens in programming will be 
necessary. Minimum qualifications include: 

- 5 years of progressively responsible experience in the field of economic 
growth/development, livelihood development, business (MSMEs) development public-
private partnerships, social entrepreneurship or other comparable sectors 
- 3 years of progressively responsible experience in project management in complex 
environments with multiple sub-grantees. 
- Demonstrated experience incorporating a gender and youth lens in programming 
- Bachelor's degree in relevant field; Masters degree is preferred 
- Azerbaijani proficiency required (oral and written) 
- English proficiency desirable (oral and written) 
- References for the last three (3) years of work experience are required and will be 
verified. 


 

4. Capacity Development (CD) Specialist 

The CD Specialist should serve as the lead technical advisor to the COP and DCOP/Technical 
Director with respect to developing, refining, and implementing various curricula focused on 
developing the skillsets of both civil society organizations and community stakeholders and 
citizens to effectively engage with government and exercise their rights under the law. Given the 
additional focus on creating more opportunities for women and youth to be active participants in 
their communities, experience applying a gender and youth lens in programming will be 
necessary. Minimum qualifications include: 

- 7 years of progressively responsible experience in the field of organizational capacity 
development, civic engagement, curriculum development, or other comparable sectors 
- 5 years of progressively responsible experience in project management in complex 
environments with multiple sub-grantees. 
- Demonstrated experience incorporating a gender and youth lens in programming 
- Bachelor's degree in relevant field; Masters degree is preferred 
- Azerbaijani proficiency required (oral and written) 
- English proficiency desirable (oral and written) 
- References for the last three (3) years of work experience are required and will be 
verified. 



6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as 
concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application 
must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below 
this listing with the letters for each requirement): 

a) COVER PAGE 

b) SF 424 FORM(S) 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-instructions.html 

Application for Federal 
Assistance (SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-instructions.html 

Budget Information (SF-
424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 


 c) REQUIRED CERTIFICATIONS AND ASSURANCES 

 The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy : 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance 
if your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 

 

d) BUDGET AND BUDGET NARRATIVE 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget 
Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The 
applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in 
Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including 
sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and 
reasonable. 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Annex 1 for Summary 
Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of effort, 
and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be broken 


down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the Budget 
Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is reasonable 
for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other activities of 
the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on personnel 
compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element of 
compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used and 
supporting market research. 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must propose 
a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget Narrative must 
include a detailed breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., superannuation, gratuity, etc.) 
and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a percentage of salaries. 

 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number 
of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such as 
company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies and 
the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental costs 
and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if any; market 
conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value 
of the property leased. 

 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements as 
the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 

 

6) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any other 
miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The applicant 
should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and seminars, and 
their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. Otherwise, the 
narrative should be minimal. 

 

7) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 


CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the 
applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost Rate 
methods: 

 

8) Cost Sharing – The applicant should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be 
provided over the life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis 
of calculation in the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the cost 
share (financial and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the 
resulting award. 

 

e) PRIOR APPROVALS IN ACCORDANCE WITH 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

f) APPROVAL OF SUBAWARDS 

 The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

1. Name of organization 
2. DUNS Number 
3. Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
4. Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
5. Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
6. Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
7. Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
8. Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) DUN AND BRADSTREET AND SAM REQUIREMENTS 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 


that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 

2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to 
Help, then to International Registrants. 

h) HISTORY OF PERFORMANCE 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed 5, as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last 5 years, and 


• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information 
concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such 
information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information 
and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

j) BRANDING STRATEGY & MARKING PLAN 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award. 

 

i) FUNDING RESTRICTIONS 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

Construction/will not be authorized under this award. 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 k) CONFLICT OF INTEREST PRE-AWARD TERM (AUGUST 2018) 

 a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization or an 
employee of the organization has a relationship with an Agency official involved in the 
competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s The term 
“conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal considerations may 
compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and duties of a USAID 
employee or recipient employee. 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits the applications. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting the 


application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) 
calendar days following discovery. 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to 
nonpublic information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 

- END OF SECTION D - 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 

 

The review and selection process will be managed by a selection committee (SC) composed of 
USAID Direct Hire personnel from USAID/Azerbaijan and USAID/Caucasus. The SC will 
review each application received based on the criteria described below and applying adjectival 
ratings accordingly. The SC will recommend one singular application as the intended Awardee to 
the Agreement Officer (AO) for his consideration for further negotiations. The final award 
decision is determined by the AO. 

The Application will be evaluated using an adjectival rating system described below. 

Exceptional 

An Exceptional application has the following characteristics: 

● A comprehensive and thorough application of exceptional merit. 

● Application meets and fully exceeds the Government 
expectations or exceeds NFO objectives and presents very low risk 
or no overall degree of risk of unsuccessful performance. 

● Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that may exist. 

Very Good 

A Very Good application has the following characteristics: 

● An application demonstrating a strong grasp of the objectives. 

● Application meets NFO objectives and presents a low overall 
degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 

● Strengths significantly outweigh any weaknesses that exist. 

Satisfactory 

A Satisfactory application has the following characteristics: 

● An application demonstrating a reasonably sound response and a 
good grasp of the objectives. 

● Application meets NFO objectives and presents a moderate 
overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project performance. 

● Strengths outweigh weaknesses. 

Marginal 

A Marginal application has the following characteristics: 

● The application shows a limited understanding of the objectives. 

● Application meets some or most of the NFO objectives, but 
presents a significant overall degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 

● Weaknesses equal or outweigh any strength that exists. 




Unsatisfactory 

An Unsatisfactory application has the following characteristics: 

● The Application does not meet the NOFO objectives or requires 
a major rewrite of the application. 

● Presents an unacceptable degree of risk of unsuccessful project 
performance. 

● Weaknesses demonstrate a lack of understanding of the 
Government’s needs. 

● Weaknesses significantly outweigh any strength that exists. 



 1. Criteria 

The merit review criteria prescribed here are tailored to the requirements of this particular 
NOFO. Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters 
which the applicants should address in their applications, and (b) set the standard against which 
all applications will be evaluated. 

Technical and other factors will be evaluated relative to each other, as described here and 
prescribed by the Technical Application Format. The Technical Application will be scored by a 
Selection Committee (SC) using the criteria described in this section. 

The criteria set forth below will be used by the selection committee to evaluate the Application 
submitted in response to the NOFO. The criteria are shown in descending order of importance. 

Evaluation Criteria 1 :Technical Approach and Methodology: Extent to which the 
application effectively outlines a theory of change, corresponding technical 
approach/methodology that reflects the key considerations and operating principles, and allows 
for the greatest flexibility to respond to the fluid political environment. The proposed 
approach/methodology should reflect the context of the opportunities and challenges presented in 
light of the shifting geopolitical landscape of the South Caucasus region and the recently 
returned regions to Azerbaijan authority. The technical approach should also demonstrate a clear 
strategy for incorporating meaningful gender and youth engagement within the targeted 
communities. 

Evaluation Criteria 2: Organizational Capability, Experience and Implementation Team: 
Appropriateness of the composition and organizational structure of the proposed implementation 
team (including key personnel), adequate delineation between the roles and responsibilities of 
sub-grantees, if any. Demonstrated successful track record of implementing similar complex 
programs supported by measurable or verifiable evidence. Comprehensive risk mitigation 
strategy that includes robust anti-fraud features as part of the Risk Assessment and Mitigation 
Plan reflecting measures to minimize opportunities for fraud and actions to be taken is presented. 
If the past experience is outside Azerbaijan, the Applicant must explain why and how that past 
experience is indicative for success in Azerbaijan. 


Evaluation Criteria 3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan: Extent to which 
the illustrative MEL plan accurately reflects the Applicant’s technical approach, and includes 
specific, appropriate, comprehensive, and meaningful indicators and, if possible, targets 
(including sex and age disaggregation), a plan for collecting base-line and follow-on data, as well 
as effective mechanisms for continuous learning and adapting. Adequately provides a 
combination of output and outcome level indicators coupled with strategies to support an 
iterative review of implementation to allow for appropriate course corrections in order to reflect 
and respond to the fluid geo-political environment. 

2. Business Review 

The Agency will review the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 
2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

 

 

- END OF SECTION E - 


 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. FEDERAL AWARD NOTICES 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. ADMINISTRATIVE & NATIONAL POLICY REQUIREMENTS 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

3. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

 

Program Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

 

All written documentation must be submitted in professional-level English. The reports listed 
below are the initial reports required by the recipient. Based on the evolving nature of the 
agreement, USAID may provide modified reporting requirements. 

 

Note: USAID’s fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30. Four fiscal quarterly 
periods begin on October 1, January 1, April 1, and July 1. 

 

· Financial Reporting: 

 Financial Reports shall be in accordance with applicable USAID Standard Provisions. 

Quarterly Financial Report: Quarterly Financial Reports shall be due within 30 days following 
the end of each quarter corresponding to USAID’s fiscal year from October 1 through September 
30. 

 

 


Final Financial Report 

The Final Financial Report shall be due within 90 days following the expiration of the award. 
Financial Reports shall be in accordance with 2 CFR 700. USAID requires recipients to use the 
Standard Form 425 or Standard Form 425a, Federal Financial Report, or such other forms 
authorized for obtaining financial information as may be approved by OMB. 

Performance Reporting 

Quarterly Performance Report - The Recipient will submit quarterly performance reports to 
reflect progress, the activities of the preceding three months and lessons learned. The report must 
describe the tasks completed in the last three months relative to what was anticipated in the 
approved work plan, and will assess the overall activity impact to date relative to the 
performance indicator targets and results defined in the activity theory of change. More details 
on the format of the quarterly performance reports will be provided after award. 

Annual Work Plan - The annual work plan details how the Recipient will use the work plan 
year effectively to achieve the activity objectives and strategic approaches. The work plan serves 
as a guide to program implementation and, once approved, represents an agreement as to the 
objectives and timing of specific tasks and interventions. The work plan is intended to be an 
annual roadmap for USAID and the Recipient. It should be closely aligned to the theory of 
change agreed upon during the start-up workshop, and clearly explain how the actions and 
outputs will lead to the expected outcomes identified in the theory of change. More details on the 
format of the work plan will be provided after award. 

Activity Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (MEL) - The Recipient is required to have an 
Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL) capable of tracking and documenting 
progress against the Activity strategic approaches and results. The MEL plan should be framed 
by, and closely aligned with, the agreed-upon activity theory of change. The MEL reflects the 
award progress over the life of the Activity and is a critical tool for planning, managing, 
documenting, evaluating performance and learning. Findings from the MEL should be reviewed 
and validated in annual pause-and reflect-sessions with USAID staff, and revised when 
appropriate in consultation with the AOR. More details on the format of the MEL plan will be 
provided after award. 

Annual Performance Report - Annual performance reports will summarize actions, progress 
and results during the year in relation to the approved work plan and the activity theory of 
change it supports. The report should include lessons learned, proposed adaptive management 
shifts, and proposed updates to the theory of change. The annual performance report will be used 
by USAID to assess the status of activity implementation. Each annual performance report will 
include an assessment as to whether the activity strategic approaches and actions are leading to 
the activity objectives. The annual performance report will cover all of the items included in the 
quarterly performance report, with a focus on the Activity results over the entire year. More 
details on the format of the annual performance report will be provided after award. 


Final Report - The Final Report must discuss all strategic approaches and results from the start 
of the award through its completion. More details on the format of the final report will be 
provided after award. 

 

4. PROGRAM INCOME 

If Program Income earned under the resultant award will be added to the Total Estimated 
Amount in accordance with 2 CFR 200.307(e)(2). 

 

5. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE 

 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 

USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include environmental 

sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its development 

programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s 

Automated Directives System (ADS) Chapters 201 and 204 
(https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200 ), which, in part, require that the potential environmental 
impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that 
appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. 

 

In addition, the recipient must comply with host country environmental regulations unless 

otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host country and 

USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

No activity funded under the awarded Cooperative Agreement will be implemented unless an 
environmental threshold determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that 
activity, as documented in a Request for Categorical Exclusion (RCE), Initial Environmental 
Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly signed by the Bureau 
Environmental Officer (BEO). (Hereinafter, such documents are described as “approved 

Regulation 216 environmental documentation.”) 

 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and all Annual Work Plans thereafter, the recipient, in 

collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative and Mission Environmental 

Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all ongoing and 

planned activities under the grant/CA to be awarded to determine if they are within the scope 

of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation. 

 

If the recipient plans any new activities outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 

environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the documentation for 

USAID review and approval. No such new activities shall be undertaken prior to receiving 

written USAID approval of environmental documentation amendments. 

 


Any ongoing activities found to be outside the scope of the approved Regulation 216 

environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the documentation is 

submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

 6. OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Section 660 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (FAA) prohibits assistance to police and 
prisons, with certain exceptions. However, Section 119(b) of the FAA provides specific 
notwithstanding authority to fund assistance to law enforcement entities for the purposes of 
“protecting and maintaining wildlife habitats and in developing sound wildlife management and 
plant conservation programs.” It also states that “special efforts should be made… to enact and 
enforce anti-poaching measures.” Relying on this notwithstanding authority, the activities 
contemplated under this award may include assistance to law enforcement entities. By way of 
policy, however, the Agency has taken the position that it will not rely on FAA Sec. 119(b) 
authority to support actual law enforcement operations. By way of definition, “law enforcement” 
is interpreted by the Agency as any entity that has authority to carry out some or all of the 
functions normally exercised by a law enforcement force, including the authority to carry 
weapons, make arrests, conduct searches, interrogate, supervise confinement or initiate 
prosecutions; and “law enforcement operations” includes activities such as participation in field 
investigations, covert operations, raids and arrests that have a potential risk to the physical safety 
of USAID partners and USG staff. The USAID Legal Officer, through the AOR, must be 
consulted and authorize any activities that might be considered “law enforcement operations.” 

An additional legal requirement related to work with law enforcement is that assistance to the 
security forces of any country is prohibited when there is credible information that such forces 
have committed gross human rights violations (FAA Sec. 620M). Therefore, beneficiaries of the 
activities who are considered “security forces” must be successfully vetted per “Leahy Vetting” 
guidelines prior to their receiving assistance. 

7. SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENTAL EXPERIENCE DOCUMENTATION 

USAID recipients must submit one electronic copy of development experience documentation to 
the Development Experience Clearinghouse. Development experience documentation may be 
submitted online: http://dec.usaid.gov . Or by mail (for pouch delivery): 

USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse 

M/CIO/ITSD/KM/DEC 

RRB M.01-010 

Washington, DC 20523-6100 

Phone: (202) 712-0579 


Email: docsubmit@usaid.gov 

In addition, the recipient must submit one electronic copy of development experience 
documentation to the AOR for the award. 

 

- END OF SECTION F - 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION G: OTHER INFORMATION 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government 
will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting 
award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use information contained 
in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

- END OF SECTION G - 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

 

Line Item 

Year 1 

Year 2 

Year 3 

Year 4 

Year 5 

Total 
Amount 
(USD) 

Personnel 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Benefits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Travel and 
Transportation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supplies 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contractual 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other Direct 
Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subawards 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Direct 
Charges 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indirect Charges 
( if any) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cost share 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Total Costs 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

- END OF ANNEX 1 - 


 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both 
mandatory and required as applicable) in full text. 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

 Standard Provision 

 

 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PREDETERMINED 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - PROVISIONAL (Nonprofit) 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - PROVISIONAL (Profit) 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (DECEMBER 2014) 

 




 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO 
PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM FOR AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE UNDER 
RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY 
AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 



REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 Required 

 Standard Provision 

As need 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 
2014) 




As needed 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE 
AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED AMOUNT 
(NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORTATION 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 2012) 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

RAA30. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH ASSISTANCE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



- END OF ANNEX 2 - 



ANNEX 3 

 

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION STRATEGY 

 

ASSESSMENT 

 

In recent years, U.S. implementing partners have experienced difficulties receiving approval to 
register themselves and their awards with the government of Azerbaijan (GOAJ) stemming from 
new legislation issued in November 2014 stipulating that foreign donors require authorization 
from the Ministry of Finance to provide grants within Azerbaijan. The impact is cumbersome 
and delayed organization and grant registrations for international and local organizations alike. It 
is particularly challenging for Democracy and Governance activities, especially when the 
Recipients of those grants/contracts are new to the country.. Accordingly, Applicants should be 
aware that significant effort and time could be needed to accomplish the organization and grant 
registrations. 

 

Other potential risks include but are not limited to: challenges securing permission to travel and 
operate in rural areas of Azerbaijan, further obstacles as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
and/or widescale interruption of internet service as was seen during the recent resumption of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 

 

MITIGATION STRATEGY 

 

The Risk Mitigation Plan will demonstrate that the applicant has a comprehensive understanding 
of the potential risks that will be faced during activity implementation. The Plan should 
document the processes, tools and procedures that will be used to manage and control those risks 
that could have a negative impact on the activity, and/or what strategies will be used to 
proactively avoid or mitigate those risks. Applicants must ensure that effective Anti-Fraud 
features are woven into the Risk Mitigation Plan as part of managing risks. The features should 
consider both prevention and response to ensure systems are safeguarded against waste, fraud 
and abuse at all levels of operations and are prepared to enact the necessary steps to address any 
allegations of fraud that may arise. 

 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PREPARATION 

 

Applicant is requested to provide a Risk Mitigation Plan as part of the Application. The Risk 
Mitigation Plan will total no more than five pages and must include the following : 

 

- An analysis of the Country operating environment for local and international 
development organizations, including an overview of the risks and problems that might 
be encountered during implementation; 


 


- Detailed guidance for how the organization will mitigate the identified risk; 
- Risk Mitigation and/or Contingency Planning options: 
- Anti-fraud features. 


 

- END OF ANNEX 3 - 


 

 

 

 


