 

 

 

 

Issue Date: Wednesday, June 30, 2021 

Deadline for Questions: Wednesday, July 14, 2021 by 5:00 PM Eastern Time 
Closing Date: Friday, July 30, 2021 

Closing Time: 5:00 PM Eastern Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 7200AA21RFA00024 

Program Title: Supporting Local Civil Society and Human Rights in Cuba 

 

Federal Assistance Listing Number: 98.001 “USAID Foreign Assistance for Programs Overseas” 

 

Dear Applicants: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the program Supporting Local Civil 
Society and Human Rights in Cuba. Eligibility for this award is not restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant(s) that best meet the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this Notice of Funding Opportunity 
(NOFO) subject to a risk assessment. Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are 
encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly to understand the type of program sought, application 
submission requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO 
and meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be 
furnished to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to 
www.grants.gov. 


 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are 
submitted at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s 
expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

Maria Munoz 

Agreement Officer 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 4 
SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 9 
SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 12 
SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 14 
SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 32 
SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 36 
SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 38 
SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 39 
ANNEX 1 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 44 
ANNEX 2 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 48 


 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

1. AUTHORITY 


 

This Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act 
(FAA) of 1961, as amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 - Uniform 
Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and 
USAID’s supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in section F. 

 

2. BACKGROUND 


 

The past several months have served as a watershed moment for Cubans demanding greater 
democratic freedoms and respect for human rights. Artists and musicians have taken to the 
streets to protest government repression, producing anthems such as “Patria y Vida,” which has 
not only brought greater global awareness to the plight of the Cuban people but also served as a 
rallying cry for change on the island. 

 

Religious leaders from multiple denominations are speaking out for freedom of religion and 
inspiring their congregations to do the same. Minority groups such as the LGBTQI+ community 
call for greater respect while Afro-Cubans demand better living conditions in their communities. 
Citizens are mobilizing not only in favor of greater political and social rights but for bread and 
butter issues that affect their daily lives. As the COVID-19 pandemic further isolated the island 
and increased calls for government response, these demands were met with enhanced 
government repression, arbitrary detentions, and other means of crackdowns. 

 

The United States Government (USG) stands with the Cuban people in their desire for a free, 
democratic, and open society that supports the human rights of all Cuban citizens. The United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID) remains committed to empowering the 
Cuban people to determine their own future. 

 

The overarching goal of U.S. support in Cuba is to realize internationally recognized civil, 
political, religious, labor, and other rights as set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and other international instruments. The United States Government seeks to promote a 
stable, prosperous, and free country for the Cuban people. 

 

The Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity (Libertad) Act of 1996 authorizes support for 
democracy-building efforts in Cuba. Under this authority, USAID supports a portfolio of 
programs that: 

● provide basic needs assistance to victims of repression, including political prisoners, their 
family members, and other individuals who are persecuted because of their political or 
religious beliefs; 
● support human rights, fundamental freedoms and democratic values by strengthening 
civil society through training on leadership skills, community organizing, outreach, and 
documenting human rights violations; and 
● facilitate the free flow of information to, from, and within the island. 


 


This NOFO seeks to fund activities to support human rights, fundamental freedoms and 
democratic values. 

 

USAID’s approach to human rights is deliberately broad, encompassing democratic rights and 
freedoms as well as social rights. In that sense, USAID is prepared to support efforts to promote 
religious freedom, freedom of expression, labor rights, and LGBTQI+ inclusion, among others. 
Groups supporting these areas contribute to an expanding public sphere in Cuba that includes 
traditional and non-traditional advocacy. While USAID ultimately seeks to support fundamental 
freedoms and democratic values, activism towards such freedoms may take many forms. In that 
sense, USAID seeks to support a wide array of groups organizing around priority issues on the 
island. 

 

3. PROGRAM OVERVIEW 


 

Under this award and subject to the availability of funds, USAID intends to provide up to $2 
million in total USAID funding over a three-year period. USAID anticipates one to two awards 
ranging from $500,000 to $1 million each. Each organization may submit only one application 
and is eligible for only one cooperative agreement. The Office of Cuban Affairs of the USAID 
Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC/Cuba) reserves the right to lessen the scope 
or reduce costs as appropriate. 

 

3. GOAL 

 

The overarching goal of the Program is to realize within Cuba internationally recognized, civil, 
religious and labor rights as set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other 
international instruments. 

 

4. OBJECTIVES AND ACTIVITIES 

 

To advance the goal, USAID proposes two objectives: 

 

a. Advance the effectiveness of independent civil society groups to advocate for greater 
human rights and freedoms. While many organizations have historically advocated for greater 
freedom on the island, many Cubans shy away from traditional forms of advocacy. Nonetheless, 
recent efforts by faith-based organizations, artists and other marginalized groups demonstrate the 
Cuban people’s burgeoning willingness to demand accountability, and greater respect for human 
rights. By incorporating a wider pool of groups as part of citizens’ demands, civil society can 
effectively expand its ranks, while also raising awareness of the Cuban government’s failings, 
which span both political and social rights. USAID seeks to support these groups in their 
demands for greater democratic rights and freedoms. 


 

Illustrative activities under this objective may include but are not limited to: 

 

● Improving the capacity of nascent and existing independent civil society organizations, 
professional associations, and other groups promoting human rights, including faith-
based, labor, and other groups. 



● Supporting local-level leadership, communication and organizational skills to develop, 
defend, and promote human rights and freedoms. 
● Increasing grassroots community engagement in local problem-solving throughout the 
island. 


 

b. Develop broader coalitions to expand civil society’s impact. Recognizing the courage 
and commitment of the many individual civil society and human rights organizations on 
the island, their impact is nevertheless limited by geography or the inability to function as 
a broader network. To that end, USAID supports efforts to strengthen Cuban civil 
society’s ability to develop multi-sector coalitions and thereby enhance their 
effectiveness. 


 

Illustrative activities under this objective may include but are not limited to: 

 

● Strengthening and facilitating the creation of issue-based and cross-sectoral networks to 
support marginalized and vulnerable populations, including but not limited to youth, 
women, LGBTQI+, religious leaders, artists, musicians, and individuals of Afro-Cuban 
descent. 
● Fostering solidarity and cohesion among groups by increasing inter-group coordination, 
communication, and recognition of similar basic goals and principles. 
● Expanding civil society and human rights activism. 


 

Applicants should outline how beneficiaries will be selected and prioritized and clearly explain 
how their local partners and local networks have the expertise, geographic reach and experience 
to carry out activities (see Section C.3. Partnerships). To maintain appropriate oversight and 
management and to avoid potential overlap and duplication of efforts, award recipients will be 
expected to coordinate and collaborate on activities with other U.S. Government program 
implementers. USAID shall not fund activities deemed to be duplicative with existing U.S. 
Government Cuba projects and activities. 

 

5. RELATIONSHIP TO USG STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS 

 

Through various activities implemented by LAC/Cuba, as well as the Department of State’s 
Bureaus for Western Hemisphere Affairs (WHA) and Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor 
(DRL), the U.S. Government provides ongoing support to targeted beneficiaries throughout the 
island to achieve its foreign policy goals. To avoid duplication of efforts, LAC/Cuba 
communicates regularly with the Department of State to ensure that programming is well 
coordinated with existing projects. 

 

The United States seeks a stable, prosperous, and free country for the Cuban people. The United 
States pursues limited engagement with Cuba that advances our national interests and empowers 
the Cuban people while restricting economic practices that disproportionately benefit the Cuban 
government or its military, intelligence, or security agencies at the expense of the Cuban people. 
The U.S. government seeks to promote human rights, religious freedom, and democracy, 
encourages the development of civil society, and engages in areas that advance the interests of 
the United States and the Cuban people. 


 

The civil society and human rights support program proposed in this NOFO intends to build 
upon prior efforts while allowing for innovation and coordination within the interagency. At the 
conclusion of the Program, Cuban civil society will be better capable of advocating on human 
rights and freedoms and will demonstrate improved coordination within various groups. 

 

6. AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION AND APPLICABLE REGULATIONS AND 
POLICIES 

 

The authority for this NOFO and any resulting award is from the Foreign Assistance Act of 
1961, as amended. Additionally, there are two statutes that are particularly critical in providing 
authority, notwithstanding other provisions of law, for USAID’s work in Cuba: (1) Section 
109(a) of the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity (Libertad) Act of 1996 (also referred to 
as “Helms-Burton Act,” P.L. 104-114); and (2) Section 1705 of the Cuban Democracy Act of 
1992 (22 U.S.C. §6004) (P.L. 102-484). Activities authorized and financed under this program 
are governed and limited by the terms of these two acts. 

 

The Libertad Act of 1996 provides authority to furnish assistance and provide other support for 
individuals and independent non-governmental organizations to support democracy-building 
efforts for Cuba, including: (1) published and informational matter to be made available to 
independent democratic groups in Cuba, (2) humanitarian assistance to victims of political 
repression and their families, and (3) support for democratic and human rights groups in Cuba. 

 

The Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 authorizes the provision of certain assistance 
notwithstanding any other provision of law. Specifically, this provision authorizes donations of 
food to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or individuals in Cuba, exports of medicines 
and medical supplies generally, and assistance through appropriate NGOs for the support of 
individuals and organizations promoting nonviolent democratic change in Cuba. 

 

The following link contains the full text of the Libertad Act: 
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/libertad.pdf 

 

The following link contains the full text of the Cuban Democracy Act (CDA): 
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/cda.pdf 

 

Applicants must closely monitor, track, verify, and report to USAID on the end-use of all 
materials sent to Cuba. LAC/Cuba is covered by a general license issued by the Department of 
Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). The general license, which covers USAID 
activities, is issued under the Cuban Assets Control Regulations, 31 CFR §515, last amended in 
October 2020 and available at https://ecfr.federalregister.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-
V/part-515. Further information and updates to the OFAC license are available at 

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/sanctions-programs-and-country-
information/cuba-sanctions. Successful Applicants will be required to obtain an applicable 
Department of Commerce license if necessary, consistent with the Export Administration 
Regulations (15 CFR Parts 740 and 746). Of particular note is the Department of Commerce 


license exception “Support for the Cuban People” found at 15 CFR § 740.21. Information 
regarding U.S./Cuba legal and/or policy requirements may be found on the following websites: 

 

a. U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control - Cuba Sanctions https://home.treasury.gov/policy-
issues/financial-sanctions/sanctions-programs-and-country-information/cuba-sanctions 
b. U.S. Department of Commerce Cuba page for exports: 
https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/policy-guidance/country-guidance/sanctioned-
destinations/cuba 
c. State Department Fact Sheet on U.S. Relations With Cuba: 
https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-cuba/ https://www.state.gov/countries-
areas/cuba/ 
d. USAID and Assistance Awards Policies: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303 


 

Applicants should also understand that, given the nature of the Cuban government, USAID 
cannot be held responsible for any injury or inconvenience suffered by individuals traveling to 
the island under USAID grant funding. 

 

Note: The term “program” as used in 2 CFR 200 and this NOFO is typically considered by 
USAID to be an Activity supporting one or more Project(s) pursuant to specific Development 
Objectives. Please see 2 CFR 700 for the USAID specific definitions of the terms “Activity” 
and “Project” as used in the USAID context for purposes of planning, design, and 
implementation of USAID development assistance. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 

 


 

 

SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

Under this NOFO and subject to the availability of funds, USAID intends to award one or two 
Cooperative Agreements pursuant to this NOFO, ranging from $500,000 to $1 million each for 
up to a three-year period of performance. Organizations may not submit more than one 
application and each organization is eligible for only one Cooperative Agreement under this 
award. Organizations that have not previously received funding from USAID are encouraged to 
apply. USAID will not fund research or feasibility studies intended to strengthen an 
organization’s understanding of the Cuban context. 

 

USAID/Cuba reserves the right to negotiate to lessen or increase the scope or adjust costs as 
appropriate. The status of ongoing U.S. Government-funded Cuba programs will be taken into 
consideration when awarding funds under this NOFO. 

 

2. Performance Indicators, Targets, Baseline Data, and Data Collection 


 

Data will be collected by the implementing partner based on the illustrative list of performance 
indicators below. Applicants may propose any of these indicators based on their applications as 
well as additional custom indicators. 

● DR.4-1 Number of U.S. Government-supported activities designed to promote or 
strengthen the civic participation of women 
● DR.4-2 Number of Politically Marginalized Individuals Receiving USG Assistance 
● DR.4.2-1 Number of human rights organizations trained and supported 
● DR.4.2-2 Number of civil society organizations (CSOs) receiving USG assistance 
engaged in advocacy interventions 
● DR.6.1-2 Number of human rights defenders trained and supported 
● CUST Number of Initiatives that Support Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms as a Result of USG-Supported Interventions 
● CUST Number of individuals who participate in civic activities with U.S. 
Government’s support 


 

3. Start Date and Period of Performance of Federal Awards 


 

The estimated start date will be upon signature of the award, on or about October 1, 2021. The 
period of performance anticipated shall be up to 36 months. 

 

4. Substantial Involvement for Cooperative Agreements 


 

USAID will be substantially involved in the program and management performance of any 
awarded Cooperative Agreement through technical collaboration on specified program 


interventions. USAID anticipates the award shall be a Cooperative Agreement. Substantial 
involvement under the award is expected to be as follows: 

 

● Approval of the Recipient’s Implementation Plan, Annual Workplan, and Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan; 
● Approval of Specified Key Personnel; 
● Agency and recipient collaboration or joint participation in cases when the recipient’s 
successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical 
knowledge; 
● Monitoring to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects or activities funded by the USG; and 
● Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards. 2 CFR 200.308(6) requires the 
recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting out 
of any work under an award. Specifically, the requirements for prior approval of sub-
awards include: 
○ For the purposes of this award, the term “sub-award” means an award of financial 
assistance in the form of money, or property in lieu of money, made under an 
award by a recipient to an eligible sub-awardee or by a sub-awardee to a lower 
tier sub-awardee. The term includes financial assistance when provided by any 
legal agreement to implement program activities, even if the agreement is called a 
contract, consultant agreement or similar term, but does not include procurement 
of goods and services nor does it include any form of assistance which is excluded 
from the definition of “award” in 2 CFR 200. 
○ “Sub-awardee” means the legal entity to which, or person to whom, a sub-award 
is made – even if that person or entity is called a contractor, subcontractor, sub-
recipient or consultant – and which is accountable to the recipient for the use of 
the funds provided (2 CFR 200). 
○ In accordance with 2 CFR 200, the sub-award, transfer, or contracting out of any 
work must be described in the application. To effectively describe all proposed 
sub-awards the recipient must provide the following: 
■ Name of the sub-awardee, and (1) in the case of a for profit commercial 
organization, the place of incorporation; or (2) in the case of a partnership, 
the place where legally organized; or (3) in the case of a non-profit 
organization, the place where legally organized; or (4) in the case of a 
person, the country of citizenship or legal residence. 
■ The program description, statement of work, or terms of reference; period 
of performance; and country of performance. 
■ The total estimated cost, including a detailed line-item budget and budget 
narrative that also includes proposed cost share, if applicable, and a copy 
of any current indirect cost rate agreement between the U.S. Government 
and the sub-awardee. For individuals, the proposed daily rate, salary, 
stipend, or honorarium (whichever applies) and the program consultant’s 
curriculum vitae. 



○ The sub-awardee must submit any of the following requests to the USAID 
Agreement Officer, through the prime recipient, for approval: 






■ Requests to enter further sub-awards or sub-contracts, including sub-
contracts with program consultants. 
■ Approval to purchase commodities. 








 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 


 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this 
program is Code 937 (the United States, the recipient country, and developing countries 
other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is a prohibited 
source). 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with Recipient and under the subject program is 
to transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the program 
“Supporting Local Civil Society and Human Rights in Cuba,” which is authorized by 
Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the 
achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and effective administration of 
the award through the application and sound management practices. The Recipient will 
assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with 
underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 

 


 

SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

U.S. and non-U.S. nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are eligible to apply. USAID 
encourages applications from potential new partners with experience in Cuba or similarly closed 
societies. An NGO means any nongovernmental organization or entity, whether nonprofit or 
profit-making (22 CFR 203.2). USAID will not accept applications from individuals. All 
Applicants must be legally recognized organizational entities under applicable U.S. law. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful applicant(s) may be subject to a 
pre-award risk assessment (Pre-award Survey) by the AO. 

 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

Faith-based organizations are eligible to apply for federal financial assistance on the same basis 
as any other organization and are subject to the protections and requirements of Federal Law. 

 

If profit-making organizations apply for funding under this NOFO, no profit or fee will be 
authorized under the activity. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 


 

Cost share refers to the resources a recipient contributes to the total cost of an agreement. Cost 
share becomes a condition of an award when it is part of the approved award budget. The cost 
share must be verifiable from the Recipient’s records and can be audited; for U.S. organizations 
it is subject to the requirements of 2 CFR 200.306, and for non-U.S. organizations it is subject to 
Standard Provision RAA14, “Cost Share,” in USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) 
303mab, “Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Nongovernmental Organizations.” If a Recipient 
does not meet its cost share requirement, the AO may apply the difference in actual cost share 
amount from the agreed upon amount to reduce the amount of USAID funding for the following 
funding period, require the recipient to refund the difference to USAID when the award expires 
or is terminated, or reduce the amount of cost share required under the award. 

 

The provision of cost share under this program is voluntary but not required. At their 
discretion, applicants may propose a cost share in cash, in-kind, or a combination of both. All 
cash and in-kind contributions committed by partners must be documented. 

 

3. Partnerships 


 

USAID will consider applications that include proposed partners (sub-recipients) for 
implementation of this award. Applicants are encouraged to partner with organizations that show 
a complementarity of skill sets and capabilities. Partners may leverage the private sector, other 


donors, international organizations, and civil society institutions, if appropriate. Please note that 
Applicants are not encouraged to partner with organizations that will require organizational 
capacity building. Rather, USAID seeks recipient organizations that have prior commendable 
performance in Cuba or other closed societies, with a preference for experience in Cuba. Subject 
matter experience by the prime recipient or sub-recipients in implementing similar programs is 
also preferred. 

 

If an Applicant includes sub-recipients for implementation of the award, Applicants should 
demonstrate how these sub-recipients complement the organizational capabilities of the 
Applicant and how the partnerships strengthen the overall program plan. 

 

While each member of the partnership should have a defined role under the agreement, the 
Prime Recipient is responsible for all administrative, management, and reporting 
requirements to USAID. Applicants should describe their proposed partnership(s), each 
partner organization, its strengths and experiences, its proposed role and responsibilities, 
and associated costs. The application should also explain how the Applicant will ensure 
the effective implementation of all program activities set forth in its proposal (including 
those carried out through sub-awards) and the delivery of timely and accurate reports 
among partner organizations. References for the past performance of each partner 
organization should also be provided. 

 

 

 [END OF SECTION C] 

 

 


 

SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact: 


 

Maria Munoz 

Agreement Officer 

mamunoz@usaid.gov 

USAID/M/OAA/SIDP 

1300 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 

Washington, DC 20523 

 

2. Questions and Submission Procedures 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to the email address specified 
here: mamunoz@usaid.gov no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter, as 
amended. Any information given to a prospective Applicant concerning this NOFO will be 
furnished promptly to all other prospective Applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that 
information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any 
other prospective Applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Applications must be submitted electronically to the following address: mamunoz@usaid.gov on 
or before the date and time indicated on the cover letter. The e-mail must be identified with the 
following subject heading: “USAID/Cuba NOFO No.7200AA21RFA00024 and the Applicant’s 
Name” 

 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each Applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: (a) Technical Application, and (b) Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, organization, 
mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the identification of the 
alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing address, telephone number 
and email address); 
● Program name 



● Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the organizations 
are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ under ADS 303). 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English. 
● Use standard 8½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive 
page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● A 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables, however, must comply with the 
12 point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the title page with the 
following legend: 

 

“This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government 
and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose 
other than to evaluate this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this Applicant as 
a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government 
shall have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the 


resulting grant. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without 
restriction.” 

 

and 

 

Mark each sheet of restricted data with the following legend: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 


 

Applications must be submitted by email to mamunoz@usaid.gov. Email submissions must 
include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an 
application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email relates 
to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments 
(e.g. “No. 1 of 4”, etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first 
email should have a subject line that states: “[USAID/Cuba NOFO No. 7200AA21RFA00024], 
[organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2.” 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted 
as consolidated email attachments, (e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it). If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. All applications 
received by the submission deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness to the NOFO and the 
application format. No additions or modifications will be accepted after the submission date. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate 
in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the 
same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a 
"corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. There may be a problem with the 
receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, applicants are discouraged from 
sending files in this format as USAID LAC/Cuba cannot guarantee their acceptance by the 
internet server. 

 

 


5. Technical Application Format 


 

The technical application will be the most important factor for consideration in selection for 
award of the proposed Cooperative Agreement(s). The technical application should be specific, 
complete and presented concisely. The application should demonstrate the applicant’s 
capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of this program. The application 
should take into account the requirements of the program and merit review criteria found in this 
NOFO. 

 

Technical applications must not exceed ten (10) single-spaced typed pages, using Times New 
Roman 12pt. font, typed on standard 8½” x11” sized paper with one-inch margins (both right and 
left) and each page numbered consecutively. 

 

Annexes are excluded from the ten (10) page limitation. 

 

Applicants are advised that any pages exceeding the page limit will not be considered for 
evaluation. 

 

Applicants should outline how the beneficiaries will be selected and prioritized and clearly 
explain how their local partners and local networks have the expertise, geographic and political 
familiarity, and experience to carry out activities. Applicants should also demonstrate how 
relationships will be built with the beneficiaries, and how their proposed program will coordinate 
to prevent duplication and ensure complementarities with other U.S. Government programs. 

 

The technical application must clearly demonstrate an in-depth understanding of the 
development challenges in context, outline specific activities and explain how the proposed 
activities would help achieve the program objectives stated in Section A. USAID is seeking 
applicants to identify unrecognized and unmet needs of Cuban civil society in its pursuit of 
human rights and democratic values. Applicants are encouraged to propose innovative yet 
realistic approaches that are most appropriate in the context of the presented issues as well as 
methods by which new approaches will be analyzed and adapted as needed throughout 
implementation. 

 

The technical approach must clearly address the factors outlined in the evaluation criteria found 
in Section E. 

 

All application documents must be in English. 

 

Application Contents: The Technical Application, at a minimum, must contain the following. 
Please note that the Cover Page and Table of Contents do not count toward the ten (10) page 
limit: 

 

● Cover Page (not to exceed one page; does not count toward the ten (10) page limit. See 
Section D.3 above for requirements) 


 


● Table of Contents (not to exceed one page; does not count toward the ten (10) page 
limit). List all parts of the technical application, with page numbers and attachments. 


 

● Executive Summary (not to exceed two pages) 


The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the 
Technical Application, with: a) the proposed vision and goals for the program; b) the 
results to be achieved, the resources and steps required to meet them in an identifiable 
period of time; and c) the managerial approach and resources that the Applicant will 
bring to bear on the overall management of the program. 

 

● Technical Approach (not to exceed eight pages) 


In this section, Applicants are not to merely repeat what is already described in this 
NOFO or in the Executive Summary. Applicants must focus on describing how they 
propose to achieve the program objective(s) and how the program will make a significant 
contribution toward achieving the development objectives of USAID as identified in the 
Program Description (Section A of this NOFO). Discuss your strategy, methodology, 
ideas for including stakeholders in setting the agenda, expected results, schedule of 
activities, programming of human resources, and performance indicators. Applications 
should describe any partner groups and/or individuals with whom Applicants wish to 
work, showing that any on-island partners demonstrate independence from Cuban 
government leadership, policies and financial support. This section should: 

 

1. State the proposed program concept, strategy and techniques for accomplishing the 
objectives and expected results outlined in this NOFO. What aspect of the proposed 
program 1) seeks to identify unrecognized, unmet and demand driven needs of civil 
society in its pursuit of human rights and democratic values; and 2) what creative and 
innovative approaches in the design and implementation are being applied? Provide 
justification for the approach. 

 

2. State the assumptions and address the inherent risks in implementing a program that 
promotes human rights in the Cuban context, based on prior experience working in 
closed societies or experience working in Cuba. Explain the possible challenges and 
how the Applicant plans to overcome these challenges. 

 

3. Present and explain the role of any specialized human rights training (if applicable), 
taking into account how the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may impact training 
activities. How will the Applicant’s expertise be leveraged in the program to 
maximize program impact? 

 

4. Present detailed, island-wide recruitment and vetting processes to ensure a balanced 
representation of marginalized communities, including youth, women, LGBTIQ+, 
and Afro-Cubans from civil society in this program. 

 

5. Explain how activities will maximize the impact and amount of program funds spent 
on the island. 

 


The following Annexes must be attached to the Technical Application and do not count toward 
the ten (10) page limit above: 

 

● Annex 1. Draft Implementation Plan (not to exceed three pages) 


Clearly present a visual timeline, broken down by month, of the activities that will be 
used to implement the program, including milestones and key deliverables. The 
Implementation Plan should address any potential contingency plans should activities be 
affected by the ongoing global pandemic and/or other potential natural disasters. 

Note: For reporting purposes, implementation plans for recipients and sub-recipients 
should mirror the USAID fiscal year, which begins October 1. A final Implementation 
Plan will be due within 60 days of a signed agreement. 

 

● Annex 2. Draft Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan (not to exceed three 
pages): Applicants are strongly encouraged to include the following components in their 
draft MEL Plan. A final MEL Plan must be submitted within 90 days of a signed 
agreement. Please see USAID ADS Chapter 201 
(https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/201.pdf) for additional information 
on USAID MEL requirements.- 
A visual representation of the proposed Results Framework upon which the 
program’s theory of change is based; 
- Monitoring Section that includes the proposed monitoring approach, including 
monitoring processes, systems, and relevant performance indicators of the 
activity’s outputs and outcomes, their baseline values (or plan for collecting 
baselines), and annual targets. The Applicant should also include expectations for 
collaboration with any external evaluations of the activity planned; plans for 
monitoring context and emerging risks that could affect the achievement of the 
activity’s results. 
- Evaluation Section that describes how the Applicant plans to evaluate the 
program, including plans for data analysis, review, and reporting to measure 
program progress against overall objectives; any proposed internal or external 
evaluations; 
- Learning Section that describes how the Applicant will address learning 
questions or knowledge gaps and allow for adjustments as circumstances change 
or learning evolves; 
- The Applicant’s approach for establishing effective procedures for collecting and 
responding to feedback from beneficiaries and reporting to USAID a summary 
of beneficiary feedback; 
- A description of the Applicant’s plan for Data Management, including plans to 
collect data, maintain data quality, store data, ensure data security, and how the 
data will be used and analyzed; and a 
- Brief description of Roles and Responsibilities for MEL-related tasks, including 
across any proposed sub-recipients (if applicable). 


 

● Annex 3. Program Management Approach (not to exceed three pages): This section 
focuses on the management plan the Applicant will be using to implement the proposed 
program. This section also reviews the documentation required to meet the standards for 



prior approval at the time of award for proposed sub-awards and program consultants. 
For this program, the Chief of Party (COP) and Key Personnel 2 (Title to be proposed by 
applicant) have been designated “Key Personnel.” The Key Personnel 2 position is 
critical in addressing continuity in the absence of the COP. 
1. Explain the staffing plan and specify the composition and organizational structure of 
the entire implementation team. Also include a description of each staff member’s 
role, technical expertise, and estimated time (level of effort) that each will devote to 
the program. Applicants must propose the Key Personnel (Chief of Party and Key 
Personnel 2) and how they will contribute to achieving the program objectives. 
Proposing a diverse staff in terms of ethnic identity, sex, and gender would be an asset 
in the program designed to address the needs of under-represented groups. In addition 
to the specific qualifications for each key personnel, the Applicants must demonstrate 
how collectively as a team, the key personnel possess the skills set forth in the 
Program Description. Proposed personnel not yet identified may be shown as “TBD” 
(to be determined). 





 

 

Key Personnel 1: Chief of Party (COP): 

The COP, who should devote no less than 30 percent of their time to the proposed 
project, oversees all activities and provides overall technical oversight for the 
program. The COP is responsible for management, oversight, and reporting of 
implementation of, progress on and quality of performance related to sub-awards 
and technical assistance under this program. The COP serves as the designated 
person for overall management of the relationship with USAID. The COP 
supervises overall program operations, including administration, logistics, 
procurement, budgeting, and financial accounting (expenditures and reporting). In 
close consultation with the AOR, the COP ensures procedures are established and 
complied with for subaward worthiness, development, implementation and close-
out, funds liquidity, procurement, and administrative actions. They have primary 
responsibility for overseeing the administrative aspects of management of all sub-
awardees, and overseeing programmatic and strategic aspects of the program. 
Ultimately, they are responsible for all sub-awards made under this agreement 
though they may delegate day-to-day management to appropriate staff. They are 
responsible for hiring staff and making sure that program operations comply with 
applicable laws. 

 

 Preferred Requirements: 

● At least ten years of experience managing and implementing similar 
development programs, with preferred experience working on Cuba 
democracy programs; 
● Demonstrated professional excellence, proven leadership, and management 
skills; and 
● Strong interpersonal skills with experience working in cross-cultural settings. 


 

Key Personnel 2: [title to be proposed by applicants]: 


Key Personnel 2 will help oversee program implementation (reporting to the 
COP) and logistics for all objectives of the program. They act as COP when the 
COP is absent and are responsible for duties delegated by the COP which may 
include monitoring, evaluation and learning of the program. In coordination with 
the COP, they will oversee day-to-day management systems for sub-awards. They 
manage the day-to-day office operations, including ensuring that USAID is 
notified of all planned travel. They are also responsible for making sure that 
program operations comply with applicable laws. 

 

 Preferred Requirements: 

● At least five years of experience working in closed countries and non-secure 
environments, with experience in Cuba, and in implementing similar 
activities. 
● Experience in monitoring and evaluation and experience working with sub-
partners and beneficiaries is highly desired. 
2. Provide the names and proposed roles and responsibilities of the key personnel 
proposed under this Cooperative Agreement. 
3. Clearly present your management and administrative arrangements to include your 
management approach for the overall execution of the proposed activities, 
organizational structure, administrative arrangements, logistical support, and personnel 
management plan which describes functions and responsibilities of key personnel. 
4. Describe the approaches to support collaboration, frequency of stakeholder 
engagement, and coordination between implementing partners, among other 
approaches. This may also include plans for operational arrangements for 
collaboration and coordination with USAID and the Department of State, and other 
partner institutions. 
5. Describe all proposed sub-awards in the application. 2 CFR 200.308(6) requires the 
recipient to obtain the AO’s approval for the sub-award, transfer, or contracting out of 
any work under an award, including fixed amount subawards as described in 
§200.333. This provision does not apply to the acquisition of supplies, material, 
equipment or general support services. Specifically, the requirements for prior 
approval of sub-award include: 
a) Name of the sub-awardee, and (1) in the case of a for-profit commercial 
organization, the place of incorporation; or (2) in the case of a partnership, the 
place where legally organized; or (3) in the case of a non-profit organization, the 
place where legally organized; or (4) in the case of a person, the country of 
citizenship or legal residence. 
b) The program description, statement of work, or terms of reference; period of 
performance; and country of performance. 
c) The total estimated cost, including a detailed line-item budget and budget 
narrative that also includes proposed cost share, if applicable, and a copy of any 











 

 

 

 

 


current indirect cost rate agreement between the U.S. Government and the sub-
awardee. For individuals, the proposed daily rate, salary, stipend, or honorarium 
(whichever applies) and the program consultant’s curriculum vitae. 
d) That the subawardee does not have active exclusions in the System for Award 
Management; does not appear on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) and 
Blocked Persons List; and is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list nor the Office of Foreign Nationals (SDN) and Blocked Persons List; and is 
not listed in the United Nations Security designation list nor the Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctions list. 



6. Furthermore, if the prime award is made without the required documentation, the sub-
award will not be considered approved unless all the above requirements are submitted 
to the Agreement Officer and the Recipient receives a signed letter approving the sub-
award from the Agreement Officer. 








 

 

Performance of a sub-award must not begin before the date of the Agreement 
Officer’s letter of approval or the date of the authorization by the prime recipient, 
whichever is later. 

 

● Annex 4. Key Personnel - Resumes (each resume must not exceed two pages): This 
section shall include resumes for all key personnel candidates and any other personnel 
proposed for significant positions. Resumes shall not exceed two pages in length and 
shall be in chronological order starting with the most recent experience. Resumes for all 
key personnel must include three performance references for each proposed key position, 
up-to-date telephone numbers and e-mail contact information. 


 

● Annex 5. Organizational Chart (not to exceed one page): The chart must show the staff 
reporting lines and relationships among the different positions. 


 

● Annex 6. Organizational Capacity (not to exceed two pages):This section focuses on the 
Applicant’s internal capabilities/resources and relevant work experience/history to 
demonstrate its capacity to successfully manage the proposed program. In this section, 
the Applicant should: 


 

1. Explain the core technical capacities/resources and home office support that the 
Applicant has to offer and address the Applicant’s financial control systems. 
2. Describe its ability to monitor and evaluate program implementation and to 
effectively report results and impact. 
3. Provide a brief description of the Applicant’s work experience/history/areas of 
expertise, including previous experience working in closed societies or other 
challenging environments, with a preference for experience in Cuba. 
4. Describe its pertinent work experience and representative accomplishments in 
developing and implementing programs similar to that outlined in this NOFO. 
5. Describe the organizational capabilities and expertise of any proposed sub-recipients, 
if applicable. 



6. If applicable, describe the proposed field management structure and financial 
controls. 


 

● Annex 7. Organization Matrix of Projects (not to exceed two pages): The Applicant must 
provide a matrix of all its contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar 
or related programs during the past three years. The reference information for these 
awards must include the performance location; title of award; brief description of the 
work performed; and dates of performance. 


 

● Annex 8. Cuba Commodities List (not to exceed two pages, if applicable) 


 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 


 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as 
concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application 
must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

If the Applicant has established a consortium or another legal relationship among its partners, the 
Business (Cost) application must include a copy of the legal relationship between the parties. 
The agreement should include a full discussion of the relationship between the Applicant and 
Sub-Applicant(s) including identification of the Applicant with whom USAID will work with for 
purposes of Agreement administration, identity of the Applicant which will have accounting 
responsibility, how agreement effort will be allocated and the express agreement of the principals 
thereto to be held jointly and severely liable for the acts or omissions of the other. 

 

The Business (Cost )Application must contain the following sections: 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for additional requirements) 

 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
(SFs) can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-




424A 

instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-
424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

 c) Required Certifications and Assurances 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application upon request by the AO: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 

(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 

(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 

 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to make an award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget 
Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The 
applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in 
Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including 
sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and 
reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 



● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 
Compensation - Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary 
rate, level of effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when 
proposed, must be broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all 
assumptions in the Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the 
proposed compensation is reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is 
paid for similar work in other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their 
established written policies on personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do 
not address a specific element of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative 
must describe the rationale used and supporting market research. 

 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown of all items related to fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 

 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the 
number of trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the 
duration of the trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s 
normal travel policies. When appropriate, please provide supporting documentation as an 
attachment, such as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 

 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per 
unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and 
supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of 
any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable 
property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 

 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to 
any subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is 
a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 

 


7 Seminars and Conferences - The applicant will indicate the subject, venue and duration of 
proposed conferences and seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, 
along with estimates of costs. 

 

8) Cost Share and Leverage - Please provide details on any proposed cost share and/or 
leverage contributions, including the donors, a narrative explanation of the contributions and 
other information as necessary (if applicable). 

 

The applicants should estimate the amount of cost-sharing resources to be mobilized over the 
life of the agreement and specify the sources of such resources, and the basis of calculation in 
the budget narrative. Applicants should also provide a breakdown of the cost share (financial 
and in-kind contributions) of all organizations involved in implementing the resulting 
Cooperative Agreement. Please note that cost share is not required under this NOFO. 

 

9) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of 
costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 

 

10) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or 
will charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E 
of 2 CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide 
the applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost 
Rate methods: 

 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA. 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by 
an Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. 
Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award 
subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit 
Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that does not have a current NICRA. 

Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, 
this methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such 
time as a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal 


entity may apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it 
charges indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200 for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but 
approval is at the discretion of the AO. 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet 
that includes the following: 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates 
for the current year. Guidance to AO: If the indirect costs are expected to be 
minimal or easily attributed to performance of a USAID agreement, the AO 
should delete this first bullet. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the 
organization, including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive 
officers, personnel administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are 
identifiable to more than one program or activity, such as depreciation, rental 
costs, operations and maintenance of facilities, and telephone expenses) for the 
previous fiscal year and estimates for the current year. 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across 
all programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that 
particular cost to each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request 
additional supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the 
application still be under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation 
to approve the applicant’s requested method. 

 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 

 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS) Number 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 



Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient 
(www.beta.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 

● DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 
● SAM registration: https://sam.gov/content/home 


 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to 
Help, then to International Registrants. 

 

h) History of Performance 

 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed three years, as follows: 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award Number; 



● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three years; and 
● Name of at least two updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work 
at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact 
information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed 
individual. 
a. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant 
organization or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an 
Agency official involved in the competitive award decision-making process that 
could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” 





 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information 
concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such 
information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information 
and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

i) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

USAID marking requirements have been waived for all LAC/Cuba program activities in 
accordance with Approved USAID Memorandum, “Marking Requirements Waiver for All Cuba 
Programs.” 

 

j) Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

k) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term 

 

Conflict of interest is defined as follows and must be avoided: 

Personal Conflict of Interest 


includes situations in which financial or other personal considerations may 
compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and duties 
of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 
b. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-
424. Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest 
after submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest 
to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 
a. The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest 
that they are aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive 
advantage in competing for this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair 
competitive advantage include but are not limited to situations in which an 
applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-public information 
regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or applicant’s 
employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 
funding opportunity. 
b. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such 
notification from the applicant. 





 

Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

l) Checklist of Required Application Submissions 

 

❏ Technical Application 
● Cover Page (not to exceed one page) 
● Table of Contents (not to exceed one page) 
● Executive Summary (not to exceed two pages) 
● Technical Approach (not to exceed eight pages) 
❏ Annex 1: Draft Implementation Plan (not to exceed three pages) 
❏ Annex 2: Draft Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan (not to exceed 
three pages) 
❏ Annex 3: Program Management Approach (not to exceed three pages) 
❏ Annex 4: Key Personnel – Resumes (each resume must not exceed two pages) 
❏ Annex 5: Organizational Chart (not to exceed one page) 
❏ Annex 6: Organizational Capacity (not to exceed two pages) 
❏ Annex 7: Organization Matrix of Projects (not to exceed two pages) 
❏ Annex 8: Cuba Commodities List (not to exceed two pages, if applicable) 
❏ Cost Application 
● SF-424 forms (found on www.grants.gov) as follows: 
o SF-424, Application for Federal Assistance 
o SF-424A, Budget Information – Non-construction Programs 
o SF-424B, Assurances – Non-construction Programs 






● An Excel spreadsheet with all cells and formulas visible that includes a summary 
budget (in U.S. dollars) and a detailed/itemized budget (in U.S. dollars). 
● Budget Narrative in MS Word or PDF format explaining all costs to be incurred. 
● Supporting Documentation 


 

[END OF SECTION D] 

 


 

 

SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. MERIT REVIEW CRITERIA 

 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that complies with the 
instructions in this NOFO in accordance with the following evaluation criteria. USAID plans to 
award one or two cooperative agreements to Applicant(s) that best meet all technical evaluation 
criteria and cost considerations, with emphasis on the Applicant’s technical proposal. Only one 
Cooperative Agreement shall be awarded per organization. Shortly after the submission deadline, 
USAID will review the applications according to the evaluation criteria set forth below. While 
Applicants should be certain to address the evaluation criteria to receive the highest possible 
score, they should also be sure to provide the detailed information requested in the “Instructions” 
found in Section D. 

 

The evaluation criteria have been tailored to this particular solicitation and identify the attributes 
required to implement the proposed program. These criteria serve to: a) identify the key areas of 
importance and programmatic emphasis which Applicants should address in their applications; 
and, b) set the standard against which all applications will be evaluated. 

 

Other Factors to Be Considered 

 

The Agreement Officer will perform a pre-award risk assessment in accordance with the 
principles established by USAID and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) (see 2 CFR 
200.205). 

 

As per ADS 303.3.9 (dated 02/04/2021), a positive risk assessment means that the applicant 
possesses or has the ability to obtain the necessary management competence to plan and carry 
out the assistance program to be funded, and that the applicant will practice mutually agreed 
upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. 

 

If USAID’s review of the full application results in a recommendation for funding, then the 
organization and USAID will enter final discussions to ensure all pre-award requirements are 
met and significant grant terms are negotiated and agreed. The exact details will vary according 
to the circumstances pertaining to each application; however, the following are common areas 
that require discussion and agreement prior to award: 

 

● Payment terms; 
● Procedures concerning administrative reporting and logistical requirements for the 
program including training components; 
● Cost sharing is not mandatory; therefore, cost sharing will not be evaluated or included in 
the merit or cost review. 
● Other award terms including audit, special provisions, and/or special award conditions. 


 

Cost will not be assigned a score but will be evaluated for cost reasonableness, allocability, and 


allowability. While cost may be a determining factor in the final award(s) decision, the technical 
merit of applications is substantially more important under this NOFO. Consideration will be 
given to the applicant’s understanding of the NOFO requirements and consistency with the 
technical application. 

 

2. REVIEW AND SELECTION PROCESS 

 

Technical applications will be evaluated in accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth 
below by a Selection Committee (SC) comprised of USAID employees, and, if necessary, other 
U.S. Government representatives or other technical experts. The team of technical experts will 
review and score applications received in response to this NOFO. 

 

The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the U.S. Government to 
the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred 
before receipt of either an Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer or a specific, written 
authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

Criteria Identification – The evaluation of applications will be completed using the following 
merit review criteria in rank order of importance. Applicants should note that these criteria serve 
to: (a) identify the significant matters which Applicants should address in their applications and 
(b) set the standard against which all applications will be evaluated. 

 

 

CRITERION 

CRITERION NAME 

Importance 

Criterion 1 

Technical Approach 

1 

Criterion 2 

Organizational Capability 

2 

Criterion 3 

Management Structure and Staffing Plan 

3 



 

A. Technical Evaluation 


 

Criterion 1 

Technical Approach 

Importance 

1 



 

A.1. Technical Approach: 

 

Instructions to Applicant & Evaluation Criteria: 

1. The technical application sets forth a convincing concept, effective strategy, and 
techniques for accomplishing the stated objectives and anticipated results outlined in this 
NOFO. 
2. The technical approach presents a well-developed, informed and sound program strategy, 
including an in-depth knowledge and understanding of the constraints and strategic 
priorities in Cuba and how these risks and assumptions will be mitigated and addressed. 
3. The proposed concept is unique and innovative and is not a continuation or duplication of 
other current or previous USG-funded Cuba programs. 
4. The technical application describes how proposed local networks or groups are ideal for 
the activities to be implemented, and how a wider recruitment process will be conducted 



in order to have a wide range of program participants from across the island, not just in 
Havana. 
5. The application articulates how marginalized communities and their specific needs will 
be incorporated into program activities. 
6. The technical application takes into account the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic when 
describing proposed activities. 


 

The following sections will be evaluated as part of the Applicant’s Technical Approach: 

1. the Executive Summary and Technical Approach sections of the Technical Application; 
and 
2. the Draft Implementation Plan (Annex 1). 


 

A.2. Organizational Capability: 

 

Criterion 2 

Organizational Capability 

Importance 

2 



 

Instructions to Applicant & Evaluation Criteria: 

1. The application demonstrates the Applicant’s ability to employ the necessary 
organizational resources to achieve program objectives in a restrictive operating 
environment. 
2. The application has a well-integrated approach for the roles and responsibilities of any 
proposed partners and/or subrecipients. 
3. The organization (as the prime or subrecipient) has experience implementing projects in 
Cuba or other similar contexts. 
4. The Applicant has a proven ability to monitor and evaluate program implementation and 
to effectively report results and impact. 


 

The following sections will be evaluated as part of the Organizational Capability criteria: 

1. The Draft Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan (Annex 2); 
2. Organizational Chart (Annex 5); 
3. Organizational Capacity (Annex 6); and 
4. Organization Matrix of Projects (Annex 7). 


 

A.3. Management Structure and Staffing Plan: 

 

Criterion 3 

Management Structure and Staffing Plan 

Importance 

3 



 

Instructions to Applicant & Evaluation Criteria: 

1. The application includes a well-organized management plan that includes a staffing 
structure and division of responsibilities to effectively administer program activities and 
achieve program objectives in restrictive operating environments. 
2. Key personnel have the experience and demonstrated success implementing programs or 
activities that are directly related to or similar in scope, magnitude, sensitivity, and 
complexity to that detailed in this NOFO. 
3. The proposed Key Personnel have experience working in closed societies, with a 
preference for experience in Cuba. 



4. The application provides the names and curriculum vitae for the two key personnel to be 
assigned to the program; the two key personnel meet the preferred requirements outlined 
in Section D, Annex 3. 


 

The following sections will be evaluated as part of the Management Structure and Staffing Plan: 

1. Program Management Approach (Annex 3); and 
2. Key Personnel Resumes (Annex 4). 


 

Overall Rating: The following sections with be evaluated in order of descending 
importance: 

● Technical Approach 
● Organizational Capability 
● Management Structure and Staffing Plan 


 

B. Business Review 

 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 
2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 


 

 

SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. The Agreement Officer is the only 
individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of public funds. No costs 
chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred before receipt of either a fully executed 
Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement Officer. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award(s) shall be made and administered in accordance with the following 
federal regulations: 

 

● For U.S. organizations in accordance with 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and the applicable 
Standard Provisions; 
● For Non-U.S. nongovernmental organizations in accordance with 2 CFR 200, the 
Standard Provisions for Non-US Non-Governmental Organizations; 
● Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) Part 31 for Commercial Organizations; 
● USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) Series 300, Chapter 303, “Grants and 
Cooperative Agreements to Non-Governmental Organizations,” which may be found 
at https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303. 
● See Annex 1 at the end of this NOFO, for a list of Standard Provisions that will be 
applicable to any awards resulting from this NOFO. 


 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

The types and frequency of financial and programmatic reports are detailed in 2 CFR 200. 

 

A. Financial Reporting: The Recipient must submit via email a copy of the Standard 
Form 425 (SF-425) on a quarterly basis to the Agreement Officer (AO) and the 
Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) within thirty (30) calendar days after the 
end of the quarter. Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: 


https://www.grants.gov/forms/post-award-reporting-forms.html 

Line item instructions for completing the SF-425 can be found at: 

https://www.grants.gov/forms/post-award-reporting-forms.html 

 

B. Performance Reporting: USAID expects high quality reports in English. Reports 
must be professionally executed, avoiding typographical and grammatical errors. Each 
of the reports must be submitted electronically to the Agreement Officer’s 



Representative (AOR) in Word, Excel, PowerPoint, or PDF format, as directed by the 
AOR. 


 

4. Standard Provisions 

 

This NOFO incorporates in full text the standard provisions applicable to the NOFO. The 
resulting awards will incorporate the Mandatory and Required as Applicable Provisions, 
depending on the type of program area, the type of organization, and funding involved. More 
information can be found at http://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/agency-policy 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 


 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

The point of contact for this NOFO and any questions during the NOFO process are as follows: 

 

Maria Munoz 

Agreement Officer 

USAID 

M/OAA/SIDP 

1300 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 

Washington, DC 20523 

mamunoz@usaid.gov 

 

Any prospective applicant desiring an explanation or interpretation of this NOFO must request it 
in writing by the date listed on the cover letter to allow a reply to reach all prospective applicants 
before the submission of their applications. Oral explanations or instructions given before the 
award will not be binding. Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this 
NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants as an amendment of this 
NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be 
prejudicial to any other prospective applicants. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 

 


 

SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

Special Provisions and Licensing Requirements for Cuba 

 

1. Licensing Requirements for Cuba 


 

a. The Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the Libertad Act of 1996, under which the 
activities financed under this NOFO are authorized, provide authority to carry out 
activities through individuals and nongovernmental organizations to promote a 
peaceful transition to democracy in Cuba. The Treasury and Commerce Departments 
regulate trade and trafficking of goods in Cuba. The Treasury Department maintains 
and enforces licensing requirements for travel to Cuba, expenditures of funds on the 
island and remittances of cash to Cuba. The Commerce Department maintains and 
enforces licensing requirements of all U.S.-origin goods to Cuba. 


 

b. The Department of Treasury has provided USAID with a general license to cover 
USAID recipients/subrecipients traveling to Cuba under this program and expenses 
they may incur while carrying out program activities on the island. USAID 
Recipients must comply with the terms of this license and Department of Treasury, 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) rules and procedures. 


 

c. All USAID Recipients intending to provide certain equipment and supplies to 
recipients in Cuba are responsible for meeting licensing requirements as set forth in 
the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) (15 C.F.R. Part 730 et seq.). Part 734 
defines the scope of items subject to the EAR. 


 

d. Certain transactions to Cuba may be eligible for a license exception if the transaction 
meets all terms and conditions listed in the EAR. Part 740 describes the terms and 
conditions for license exceptions. USAID draws your attention to Section 746.2 of 
the EAR which states the licensing policy for Cuba and lists license exceptions. See 
also Section 740.19, which lists certain license exceptions for Consumer 
Communications Devices (commodities and software), Section 740.12 on gift 
parcels and humanitarian donations, and Supplement No. 2 to Part 740, which lists 
items that may be donated under the humanitarian license exception. Note that while 
a transaction may be exempted from licensing, certain excepted transactions may 
still require detailed documentation under the EAR. USAID Recipients are 
responsible for meeting all documentation requirements. 


 

e. A Recipient’s Commerce license is not transferable to its sub-recipients. Each sub-
recipient under this award is individually responsible for meeting all licensing 
requirements under the EAR. The initial penalty for failure to comply with licensing 
requirements is $250,000. A standard penalty includes four related violations 
totaling approximately $100,000 in fines. 


 


f. For general information concerning the license application process and licensing 
policy, please consult the Bureau of Industry and Security’s (BIS) website at 
www.bis.doc.gov which includes a link to the EAR. USAID Recipients are 
encouraged to attend a BIS training workshop to better understand the licensing 
process and requirements. Check the BIS website for the training schedule. If you 
need assistance with filing a license application, please call the Outreach and 
Educational Services Division at (202) 482-4811. If you have questions concerning 
licensing policy, please call the Foreign Policy Division at (202) 482-4252. 


 

g. If the Recipient contemplates sending private (non-Federal) funds to Cuba to further 
the objectives of this Agreement and such funds would constitute the Recipient’s 
“counterpart funds” under the Agreement, the Treasury Department’s License No. 
CU-2014-312739-1 should permit the Recipient to send such funds to Cuba to carry 
out activities authorized under the Cuban Democracy Act. However, it is 
recommended that all Recipients intending to introduce funds into Cuba seek 
confirmation from Treasury/OFAC that the use of private Recipient funds is covered 
by the existing license. 


 

h. If the non-Federal funds are covered by an appropriate license and such use of 
counterpart funds is contemplated under the scope of the Agreement, cash 
contributions would count toward any cost-sharing requirements that the Recipient 
may have, assuming that the other cost-sharing criteria found in 2 CFR 200 have 
been met. 


 

Information regarding U.S./Cuba legal and/or policy requirements may be found at the 
following websites: 

 

● U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC): 
http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/pages/cuba.aspx 
● OFAC Cuba FAQs: http://www.treasury.gov/resource-
center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/cuba_faqs_new.pdf 
● U.S. Department of Commerce Cuba page for exports: 
http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/policy-guidance/country-
guidance/sanctioned-destinations/cuba 
● State Department Fact Sheet on U.S. Relations With Cuba: 
https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-cuba/ 
https://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2886.htm 
● USAID and Assistance Awards Policies: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303 


 

2. Cuban Democracy Act and Libertad Act 


 

a. This Cooperative Agreement is made pursuant to the authorities of the Cuban 
Democracy Act of 1992. 22 U.S.C. 6001 et. seq., Sec. 6004, (“CDA”) and the Cuban 
Liberty and Democratic Solidarity (Libertad) Act of 1996, 22 U.S.C. Sec. 6021 et. 
seq., Sec.6039, (“Libertad Act”). Activities authorized and financed under this 



Cooperative Agreement are governed and limited by the terms of the CDA and the 
Libertad Act. 


 

b. The CDA and the Libertad Act authorize assistance through nongovernmental 
organizations to support individuals and independent nongovernmental organizations 
to promote peaceful, nonviolent democratic change in Cuba through various types of 
democracy-building efforts for Cuba. The Recipient agrees that funds made available 
under this Cooperative Agreement will only be utilized for peaceful, nonviolent 
activities, in accordance with the CDA and the Libertad Act. 


 

c. No funds or assistance under Cooperative Agreements resulting from this NOFO 
may be provided to the Cuban Government, as stated in the Libertad Act. The 
Libertad Act, 22 U.S.C. Sec. 6023(1) and (5), defines “Cuban Government” as 
including the government of any political subdivision of Cuba, and also any “agency 
or instrumentality” of the Government of Cuba, as these terms are further defined in 
28 U.S.C. Sec. 1603(b). Section 1603(b) states that an organization which is either a) 
an “organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof” (here an organ of the 
Cuban Government), or b) “a majority of whose shares or other ownership interest is 
owned by a foreign state or political subdivision thereof” is an “agency or 
instrumentality of a foreign state,” thus ineligible for funding under this Cooperative 
Agreement. Employees of the Government of Cuba, as defined above, are also 
ineligible for assistance under this Cooperative Agreement while working in their 
official capacities. However, such persons, while not working in their official 
capacities as employees of the Cuban Government, are considered as individuals and 
are eligible for assistance. Furthermore, merely providing information on transitions 
to democracy, human rights, and market economies to individuals who are Cuban 
Government employees is not considered assistance to the Cuban Government, 
because the information is offered to these persons as individuals, and does not 
benefit the current Government of Cuba. 


 

d. Conference Report to the Libertad Act, H.R. 104-468, page 50, clarifies that 
“incidental payments or indirect benefits to commercial or regulatory entities of the 
Cuban Government, e.g., payments for hotels, car rental, travel or transportation to or 
within the island, purchases of other goods or services in the local economy, customs 
fees, migration fees, or other comparable government charges” are not considered to 
be assistance to the Cuban Government which is prohibited by the Libertad Act. 


 

e. The Recipient shall take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure that the above 
special provisions (a)-(d) are followed. Violation of special provision (b) above is 
grounds for termination of this Cooperative Agreement for cause and disallowance of 
costs incurred. Violation of special provision (c) may lead to disallowance of costs 
incurred. 


 

f. Due to the political sensitivity of the USAID Cuba Program, USAID does not require 
any attribution to USAID or to the U.S. Government in any materials that will be 
distributed on the island. 



 

g. Given the nature of the Cuban regime and the political sensitivity of the USAID 
Program, USAID cannot be held responsible for any injury or inconvenience suffered 
by individuals traveling to the island under USAID grant funding. 


 

3. Compliance with U.S. Laws and Regulations 


 

All USAID Cuba Program partners are reminded that they are expected to comply with all terms 
of their Cooperative Agreements as well as with all U.S. laws and USG regulations. This 
includes but is not limited to the following: 

 

a. Recipients must observe U.S. laws that protect copyrights and other intellectual 
property. Without advance written permission from holders of copyrights, Recipients 
may not copy books, videos, audio cassettes, CDs, computer software and other 
informational materials for dissemination in the U.S. or elsewhere, or for distribution 
inside Cuba. 


 

b. Because of the First Amendment to the Constitution, Recipients may not use USG 
funds to purchase, copy, mail, or distribute religious or anti-religious materials. 


 

c. Grantees and their sub-recipients may not send any equipment to Cuba without first 
meeting Department of Commerce licensing requirements as set forth in the Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR) (15 C.F.R. Part 730 et seq.), no matter who 
requests the equipment or how it is sent. Refer to Section VIII.A.1(c) above. 


 

4. Non-Federal Audits and Financial Reviews 


 

a. In accordance with 2 CFR 200, the Recipient and its sub-recipients are subject to the 
audit requirements contained in the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 
U.S.C. 7501–7507). The Recipient and its sub-recipients must use an independent, 
non-Federal auditor or audit organization which meets the general standards specified 
in generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) to fulfill these 
requirements. 


 

b. Under the LAC/Cuba program, additional financial reviews and audits may be 
required. 


 

5. Special Travel Liability Clause for Cuba 


 

a. Disclosure and Assumption of Risk: Certain activities under this Cooperative 
Agreement will be performed in Cuba. Working in a closed society, such as Cuba, 
presents particular challenges and risks to the Recipient (including its subrecipients, 
consultants, etc.). The U.S. government cannot ensure the safety and security of 
Recipient assets and personnel, particularly as relates to individuals traveling to Cuba 
under USAID funding, or project staff based in Cuba. Implementation of USAID 



programs in Cuba requires Recipient awareness of political sensitivities and 
assumption of risks associated with hostile actions of the Cuban government. 


 

The Recipient will not serve as an agent or act under the direction of USAID and will 
be responsible for the efficient and effective administration of its own programs with 
sound business judgment, including any precautions inherent therein. USAID will 
reimburse costs to the extent allowable (i.e., reasonable and allocable to the grant) up 
to the stated amount of the grant. To the extent not prohibited or contradicted 
elsewhere by Federal law, regulation, or policy, the Recipient shall not hold USAID 
liable for injury, death, detainment, incarceration, kidnapping, property loss, 
damages, or expenses incidental to those liabilities, suffered by, or attributable to the 
acts, omissions or negligence of, the Recipient, its agents, or its employees 
implementing programs in Cuba under this NOFO. 

 

b. Consultants and Travelers 


 

Special thought and consideration should be given to the selection of 
consultants and other individuals who may be required to travel to Cuba. It is 
preferable for these travelers to speak Spanish fluently, possess a solid 
understanding of the cultural context, and have prior experience on the island, 
in order to maximize their effectiveness in this unique operating environment. 
To the extent possible, travel by U.S. citizens should be avoided. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 

https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab 

The actual Standard Provisions included in the award will be dependent on the organization that 
is selected. The award will include the latest Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. 
non-governmental organizations. The award will also contain the following “required as 
applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

Not Required 

 

Standard Provision 

TBD 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PREDETERMINED (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PROVISIONAL (Nonprofit) (NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - 
PROVISIONAL (Profit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA5. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA6. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA7. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A 
RESEARCH SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 

 

 

RAA8. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS 
(MARCH 2004) 

 

 

RAA9. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY 
(COOPERATING COUNTRY TITLE) (NOVEMBER 
1985) 

 

 

RAA10. COST SHARING (MATCHING) 
(FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA11. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

 

 

RAA12. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 
2003) 




 

 

RAA13. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA14. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS 
TO INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA15. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE 
IMPLEMENTATION (ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 
2012) 

 

 

RAA16. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 
2014) 

 

 

RAA17. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA18. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - 
ASSISTANCE (DECEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR 
THE DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS 
INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF 
SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, 
OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM 
FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA24. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA25. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA26. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND 
USAID’S INFORMATION SYSTEMS (AUGUST 
2013) 

 

 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA 
INSURANCE UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE 
MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA29. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA30. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 




 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Not Required 

 

Standard Provision 

 

 TBD 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND 
REFUNDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT 
COST RATE AGREEMENT (NICRA) (NOVEMBER 
2020) 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED 
AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

RAA5. INDIRECT COSTS – DE MINIMIS RATE 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA6. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF 
AWARD MANAGEMENT (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA7. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION (NOVEMBER 2020) 

 

 

RAA8. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA9. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR 
TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA10. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA11. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA12. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA13. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA14. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 
2003) 

 

 

RAA 15. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA16. PROGRAM INCOME (AUGUST 2020) 

 

 

RAA17. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS 
TO INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR 
THE DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS 
INVOLVING CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

 

 

RAA19. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH 
SUBJECTS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA20. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF 
SUPPORT FOR PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 




 

 

RAA21. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA22. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, 
OR ADVOCATE FOR THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

 

 

RAA23. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 

 

 

RAA24. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

 

 

RAA25. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 
2014) 

 

 

RAA26. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR 
PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION OR SEX 
TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA27. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-
LOCAL ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

 

 

RAA28. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA 
INSURANCE UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

 

 

RAA29. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND 
CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND 
PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

 

 

RAA30. RESERVED 

 

 

RAA31. NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY 
(NOVEMBER 2020) 



 

 

 


ANNEX 2 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

 

ADS Automated Directive System 

AO Agreement Officer 

AOR Agreement Officer’s Representative 

BIS Bureau of Industry and Security 
CDA Cuban Democracy Act 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

COP Chief of Party 

CSO Civil Society Organizations 

DRL Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor 
DUNS Data Universal Numbering System 

EAR Export Administration Regulations 

FAA Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 

FAQs Frequently Asked Questions 

FAR Federal Acquisition Regulations 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

LGBTQI+ Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer & intersex 

LIBERTAD Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act 

MEL Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 

NGO Non-Governmental Organization 

NOFO Notice of Funding Opportunity 

OAA Office of Acquisition & Assistance 

OFAC Office of Foreign Assets Control 

RFA Request for Applications 

SAM System for Award Management 

SC Selection Committee 

SF Standard Form 

USAID U.S. Agency for International Development 
USG United States Government 

WHA Western Hemisphere Affairs 

 

 


