

 

 

 

 Issue Date: January 11, 2019 

 Deadline for Questions/Clarifications: January 21, 2019, 12:00 PM Nigerian Time 

Application Closing Date & Time: February 25, 2019, 4:00 P.M. 

 

 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: SOL-72062019RFA00002 - 

 Request for Full Technical and Cost/Business Application 

 

Program Title: Water For Agriculture Activity 

 

The United States Agency for International Development in Nigeria (USAID/Nigeria) is seeking 
applications for a Cooperative Agreement from qualified entities to implement the Water for 
Agriculture program as described in the attached Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO). Eligibility 
for this award is not restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the Applicant(s) who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk assessment. 
Eligible parties interested in submitting an application are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly 
to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and selection process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the Applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the Applicant to regularly check the 
website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding opportunity and 
to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. USAID bears no 
responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. If you have difficulty 
registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-
800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an Applicant unless the Applicant has complied with all applicable unique 
entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in Section D.6.f. 
The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to 
begin registration early in the process. 

 

Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished to 
all potential Applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the part 
of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in preparation or 
submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted at the risk of the 
Applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the Applicant’s expense. 

 

 


 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

//Signed// 

Cheryl Hodge-Snead 

Agreement Officer 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Contents 
1. SECTION A- PROGRAM DESCRIPTION..........................................................................4-18 
2. SECTION B – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION ........................................................ 19-20 
3. SECTION C – ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION .................................................................. 21-22 
4. SECTION D – APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION ........................... 23-44 
5. SECTION E – APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION…………………………......45-47 
6. SECTION F – FEDERAL AWARD AND ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION ......... 48-61 
7. SECTION G – FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACTS ………………………….62 
8. SECTION H – OTHER INFORMATION .................................................................................. 63 
ANNEX #1: ILLUSTRATIVE BUDGET FORMAT ............................................................................ 64 
ANNEX #2: STANDARD PROVISIONS .......................................................................................... 65-68 
ANNEX #3: ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ...................................................................... 69-71 
ANNEX #4: PAST PERFORMANCE INFORMATION ................................................................. 72-74 
ANNEX #5: SAMPLE FORMAT FOR INITIAL SECURITY PLAN .......................................... 75-78 
ANNEX #6: USAID/NIGERIA QUARTERLY REPORTING STANDARD FORMAT FOR ALL 
IPS .............................................................................................................................................................. 79 
ANNEX #7: BRANDING AND MARKING REQUIREMENT WAIVER ......................................... 80 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION A – PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

WATER FOR AGRICULTURE 

I. INTRODUCTION 

In northeastern Nigeria, especially in Adamawa, Borno, and Yobe states, an acute food security 
crisis has unfolded in the wake of eight years of massive displacement, the neglect and 
destruction of agricultural systems, a lack of access to farmland, and the loss of livelihoods as a 
result of the Boko Haram and ISIS in West Africa (ISIS-WA) insurgencies. In these three 
northeastern states, 3.9 million people are estimated to be living in severe crisis and emergency 
phases of water-dependent food and nutrition insecurity, including 1.7 million members of host 
communities, 1.6 million internally displaced persons (IDPs), and 600,000 returnees.1 

1 Nigeria-Northeast: Humanitarian Needs Overview November 2017. United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). 

2 Climate change and herder farmer conflicts in West Africa, Climate change, Security risks and conflict reduction 
in West Africa, A case study of farmer herder conflicts in Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Burkina Faso, 1960-2000. 
Cabot, C, 2017. 

3 Northeast Nigeria Joint Livelihood and Market Recovery Assessment, 2017. 

4 The resources-conflict debate revisited: untangling the case of farmers-herdsmen clashes in the North-Central 
region of Nigeria, Emmanuel Terkimbi Akov, August 30, 2017, African Security Review Journal, Volume 26, 2017, 
Issue 3. 

Over 78 percent of IDPs live in host communities. The influx of IDPs and returnees has 
overwhelmed these vulnerable communities, placing considerable pressure on already fragile 
agricultural resources, overstretching key public services, and diminishing food, water, and 
income sources. These deteriorating conditions are conflict drivers in many instances. 

The impact of conflict on agricultural production has been high, including livestock losses, 
destruction of irrigation and farming facilities, and the collapse of extension services, coupled 
with reduced production due to limited access to water.2 Populations affected by the 
insurgencies are experiencing low levels of food consumption due to depleted household stocks, 
poor access to markets, limited income opportunities, and diminished livelihoods coping 
strategies. Prices for local staple food crops and imported staples, including rice, millet, maize, 
and sorghum, have increased due to the depletion of food stocks, import restrictions, and a 
weakening Naira; these prices have remained high through 2017.3 

Lack of rainfall and irrigation infrastructure have further constrained agricultural livelihoods 
activities as confirmed by a recent Livelihoods and Market Recovery Assessment in the 
Northeast.4 The problem is not just the lack of irrigation infrastructure and equipment, but also 
inadequate water governance and management, and poor harvesting and storage of rainwater. 
Most of the streams supplying water for household and livestock use are seasonal in nature. 
Hand-dug wells are drying out during the dry season. As a result, women trek several kilometers 
each day in search of water. 


Large numbers of people in the affected states base their livelihoods on informal activities that 
include small-scale farming, livestock rearing, agro-processing, and non-farm microenterprises, 
such as making mud bricks for construction. Returning to these activities as normalcy returns to 
the area and returnees resettle into their communities is a priority. To restore livelihoods among 
the affected populations, securing an adequate water supply is of paramount importance. 

Water will continue to be a significant issue for people living in Northeast Nigeria. The Lake 
Chad region, whose water once supported farming and livestock, has lost almost 90 percent of its 
original size.5 The water basin is diminishing due to recurring droughts and increased human 
activities; the situation is further exacerbated by climate change. The drying of the lake has 
significantly harmed the fishing industry and has starved grazing and crop lands, displacing tens 
of thousands of people.6 Economic activities that are indigenous to the people in the region are 
in collapse, and competition over scarce water resources among community members, including 
smallholder farmers and herders, is recognized as one of the drivers of conflict in the region.7,8 
The interventions introduced through this Activity address not only acute, immediate water 
needs, but chronic issues that will continue to impact this region. 

5 Motherjones.com/environment/2014/06. How environmental disaster is making Boko Haram violence worst. 

6 Water Scarcity and the impending water related conflicts in Nigeria, Gusikit and Lar, 2014. 

7 Nigeria Hunger crisis deepens, spills over into Lake Chad basin. FAO, Rome, 24 February 2017. 

8 Mercy Corps led interagency Livelihood Markets Recovery Assessment, 2016 

9 Based on expected funding levels, cost of infrastructure, and water requirements for crops and livestock 
(http://www.fao.org/docrep/012/i1531e/i1531e.pdf) 

 

USAID/Nigeria seeks applications from organisations that articulate an innovative and 
practical approach to develop and implement interventions that will sustainably increase 
water availability and management, towards increasing agricultural productivity in secure 
and accessible areas in Adamawa, Borno, and Yobe states. 

The goal of this Activity is to increase agricultural productivity and income generation among 
smallholder farmers. The purpose is to provide adequate and sustainable water supply to 
vulnerable populations for both farming and livestock in selected crisis-affected communities in 
the three states. The magnitude of construction and rehabilitation is $3 million. This Activity 
will: 

● increase access to water for farming and livestock consumption. 
● mitigate conflicts amongst farmer and livestock herders with separate sources of water. 
● strengthen the capabilities of local institutions to sustainably manage the water sources. 


 

In achieving these objectives, this Activity aims to increase the productivity of a minimum of 
4,000 smallholder farmers and 50,000 herders in the northeast region.9 


Subject to the availability of funding, USAID intends to provide approximately $8 million in 
total funding for this Activity over three years. Local communities and host governments will be 
expected to provide in-kind contributions to support this Activity. 

This Activity will improve livelihood opportunities by increasing water access points and 
improving the capacity of local governments and communities to govern and manage water 
infrastructure and water resources. Increased and reliable access to water will strengthen 
smallholder farmer productivity and improve livelihoods. Increased access to water will also 
mitigate conflict between host communities, IDPs, smallholder farmers, and livestock herders, 
and reduce drivers of violent extremism which threaten community recovery and stability. 
Through appropriate water resource interventions, this Activity will promote economic growth 
and stability in insurgency-affected areas. 

Water for Agriculture’s primary beneficiaries include individuals and communities affected by 
the ISIS-WA and Boko Haram insurgencies (including IDPs, host communities, and returnees). 
These beneficiaries will be reached through key interventions that are tailored to create on-farm 
opportunities for those who are in the agricultural value chain as well as herders of livestock in 
the targeted geography. The Activity will identify and build the capacity of relevant institutions 
to serve these target populations during and post Activity implementation. 

II. DETAILED PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

Development Challenge 

 

As the threat of violence in some geographic areas recedes, the security situation in these 
communities gradually stabilizes, and displaced populations return to their homes and farms to 
re-establish their livelihoods. This increase in population in Local Government Areas (LGAs), is 
typically accompanied by increased water demand, and dearth of effective water management or 
governance. With these pressures, water resources for household, farming, and livestock 
activities may become further diminished, potentially resulting in increasing tensions between 
IDPs and host communities. 

If access to adequate water for household use and livelihoods opportunities is increased, and 
local governance capacity to engage in the design and management of water infrastructure is 
strengthened, then agricultural productivity will be increased, and conflict mitigation and 
community recovery will be consolidated. This Activity will promote economic growth, 
recovery, and stability in insurgency-affected areas through the proper management of water 
resources and improved agricultural practices. 

Water for Agriculture aligns with the USAID/Nigeria CDCS goal of Reduced Extreme Poverty 
in a More Stable, Democratic Nigeria. It will directly contribute to DO1: Broadened and 
Inclusive Growth, particularly IR 1.1: Agricultural competitiveness increased, and sub-IR 1.1.1: 
Agricultural productivity increased. It will also contribute directly to DO 3: Strengthened Good 


Governance, particularly IR 3.2: Improved responsiveness of targeted government institutions, 
and to IR 3.4: Conflict mitigated among at-risk communities. This Activity will contribute to at 
least ten of the sixteen levers of the Government of Nigeria (GON) 2016-2020 Agriculture 
Promotion Policy (APP). This Activity will also support the USAID Water and Development 
Strategy Strategic Objective 2 (SO2): to manage water for agriculture sustainably and more 
productively, and to enhance food security for the underserved and most vulnerable. 

Activity Components and Results 

The Activity is comprised of three overarching sets of interventions that will increase access to 
water through water infrastructure development and technical assistance. While the first 
component will rehabilitate and create new water infrastructure, the second and third 
components will build the capacity of state and local institutions, and Water User Associations 
(WUAs), which consist of smallholder farmers’ cooperatives and livestock herders, to 
sustainably manage the water infrastructure and apply new agricultural techniques. 

Efficient, sustainable, and equitable allocation and use of water in communities requires 
adequate physical infrastructure; technical and managerial understanding of the resource; the 
capacity to anticipate change; and a dialogue-based, cross-sectoral, and inclusive process to give 
legitimacy to management decisions, backed by effective policies and institutions. Component 1 
of this Activity will support the development or rehabilitation of water infrastructure that is 
appropriate to the locations and the user base. Component 2 of this Activity will promote good 
governance and the development and adoption of scenario and dialogue-focused platforms to 
inform decision-making, the adoption of conducive policies, laws and related institutional 
frameworks through training and other activities that enhance sustainability of water supply for 
agriculture. This component will also explore key critical challenges to water security and 
introduces dimensions of an integrated water management which can bring solutions to the 
specific issues involving farmers and herders. Component 3 of this Activity will include 
training, sensitization of smallholder farmers and herders on new agricultural practices and 
provision of tools and technologies to increase agricultural productivity. 

Activity Components and Illustrative Interventions are presented below: 

Component 1: Construct or Rehabilitate Water Infrastructure for Livestock and Small-scale 
Irrigation 

Component one will consist of hard deliverables that will bring water access points where mostly 
rain-fed agriculture exists. The design, implementation, and evaluation of water infrastructure 
interventions must include technical standard for the provision of water for livestock as outlined 
in the Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Livestock Emergency Guidelines and 
Standard (LEGS). Infrastructure interventions must follow best practices to meet livestock 
consumption needs and public health protection as outlined in LEGS chapter 7, and FAO’s 


Water ForAgricultureNoticeof Funding Opportunity (NOFO)
Solicitation # 72062019RFA00002

Livestock-related interventions during emergencies.10They will also follow FAO’sguidelineson the construction of small village level earthdams.11Construction must be completed duringthe second year of implementation.

Illustrative interventions:

●Calculate livestock population and farmer water needs in target locations.
●Design plans that demonstrate the holdingcapacity of new or rehabilitated small villagelevel earthen dams and ponds that can meet thecurrentand future needs of smallholderfarmersand herders.
●Complete ad hoc analyses, which may include:energy, environmental, gender, climaterisk, hydrologic, geologic and geophysical surveys.
●Select feasible locations for water access points.
●Build or rehabilitate earthen dams for irrigation purposes. 
●Build or rehabilitate earthen ponds with different sizes troughs for livestock use.
●Build and/or rehabilitating irrigation networks to deliver water to small-scale farms.
Expected results include:

●Increased water access for irrigation purposes to a minimum of 4,000 smallholderfarmers.
●Increased wateraccess for livestock consumption to a minimum of 50,000 herders.12
Component 2: Strengthening Capacity forWaterGovernance and Management

Technical Assistance-based interventions will be extended to government institutions andrelevant stakeholders to ensure the sustainabilityof new or rehabilitated wateraccess pointsthrough proper watergovernance and management. Applicants will design, develop, and 
implement interventions to enhance the governance capacities and competencies of state andlocalInstitutions to provide water services foragricultural purposes to selectedcommunities.
Such interventions will include tools and activities to support governmentinstitutions and otherrelevant stakeholders, including WUAs, made up of smallholder farmersand livestock herders,
to establish an enabling environment, and to strengthen institutional mechanisms to address thecomplexities of irrigation management. Theseentities are will beresponsible forcoordinatingconstruction and operation and maintenance ofthe ponds/pans(not to exceed 10,000 m3) orsmall village level earthendams(not to exceed 50,000 m3)in the community, establishingsystemsfor WUA members, establishing the best revenuecollection method (includes a costrecovery systemfor operation and maintenance), and managing thefunds. Construction will be

10http://www.livestock-emergency.net/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/LEGS-Handbook-2nd-edition-web-version1.pdf

11Manual on small earth dams: Aguide to siting, design and construction. Food and Agriculture Organization of theUnited Nations FAO,Rome 2010. FAO Irrigation and Drainage paper 64.12Livestockwater use: cattle 40-60 liters/day, sheep: 2-6 liters/day,goat: 3-8 liters/day(http://www.fao.org/docrep/012/i1531e/i1531e.pdf)

8


done in accordance with ADS 303 maw and ADS 303.3.11 that limit the cost of construction 
activities at a single project to less than$500,000. The implementing partner will make 
institutional support available to the participating LGAs, such as information technology, and 
alternative power supply options (such as solar pumps), depending on the type of irrigation 
adopted. The Applicant will work with existing WUAs or create new WUAs to manage water 
structures based on assessments to be conducted in collaboration with state and local government 
institutions and other relevant stakeholders. 

Illustrative interventions: 

● Design governance and institutional frameworks for water governance, 
● Strengthen state and local government institutions, NGO, and Community Based 
Organizations’ understanding of good governance in the water sector to promote 
knowledge sharing through training and other technical assistance; 
● Establish and train new WUAs or strengthen existing WUAs to monitor water 
availability, prioritize usage, and mitigate conflict, demonstrating balance among 
different community groups, cognizant of gender sensitivities to manage and sustain 
investments; 
● Develop incentive and regulatory measures for agricultural water users, targeted 
agricultural investments, improved infrastructure modernization, improved farm-
management practices, better extension and water services; and 
● Establish guidelines on user fees and cost recovery. 


 

Expected results include: 

● Water policy reforms at the scheme, farms and plot levels operationalized; 
● Governance and institutional frameworks designed and implemented; 
● Water user fees established; 
● WUAs which possess the human, technical, and financial resources to execute their 
responsibilities to manage water access points at a cost; 
● Reduced water conflicts between farmers and livestock owners; 


 

Component 3: Strengthening Capacity for Smallholder Farmers’ Cooperatives and Livestock 
Herders groups 

Capacity building will be provided to smallholder farmers’ cooperatives and livestock herders 
groups on improved production practices and new technologies as applicable to irrigation 
systems and dry season crop and livestock production. Interventions will also include 
sensitization on sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures with regard to the transmission of 
water-borne disease between human and livestock in the communities. 

Public and private institutions at all levels must have the capacity to carry out their roles and 
responsibilities for effective agricultural water service delivery in northeast Nigeria. Institutional 
capacity includes adequate personnel with the full range of skills required to carry out their 


functions; an “organizational home” within the institution with assigned responsibility; mastery 
of the agreed-upon methodology, systems, and procedures required for implementation; and the 
ability to monitor Activity effectiveness and make continual adjustments. 

Illustrative interventions: 

● Create and/or strengthen agricultural cooperatives (farmers and livestock herders groups) 
and other relevant local water organizations’ institutional capacity on standard operating 
procedures of irrigation systems, including operations and maintenance, to ensure 
efficiency and sustainability of water supplies through training and other technical 
assistance; 
● Build capacity of smallholder farmers and livestock herders (beneficiaries) on improved 
agricultural practices and technologies to enable them take advantage of increased access 
of water, especially during the dry season through training and other technical assistance; 
● Build capacity of beneficiaries on sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures with 
regards to prevention of water-borne diseases between human and livestock population; 
● Support agronomic practices that achieve greater production with less water use; 
● Incorporate water-efficient and drought-tolerant crops and varieties; 
● Utilize irrigation technologies that optimize water use efficiency. 


 

Expected results include: 

● Reduced incidences of water-borne diseases in the communities; 
● Increased agricultural productivity of a minimum of 4,000 smallholder farmers and 
50,000 herders; 
● Increased annual farm production and productivity of a minimum of 4,000 smallholder 
through both wet and dry season cropping; 
● Increased livestock production and productivity by a minimum of 50,000 livestock 
herders due to increased availability of water sources during both wet and dry seasons. 


 

III. GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS 

 

In order to maximize the impact of this Activity, interventions will only occur in secured parts of 
Borno, Adamawa, and Yobe States. LGAs in these areas currently have agricultural 
development plans and have engaged with USAID/Nigeria to initiate economic recovery 
interventions through the Feed the Future Nigeria Livelihood Project which ended in July 2018. 
Within these states, priority will be given to areas where the security situation allows for safe 
movement and market activity. Flexibility will be required given the fluid security situation in 
many areas. Site selection for interventions should take into account recent and existing 
interventions by other implementing partners so as to leverage resources and avoid duplication of 
efforts. 

 

Selection criteria when considering villages for site specific interventions must include: 


● Severely conflict-affected communities that are in recovery mode; 
● Communities facing serious water shortages; 
● Communities where violent conflicts between nomadic herders and sedentary agrarian 
communities threaten security and stability; 
● Communities where vulnerability to conflict and the risk of extremism is low (this could 
exclude high risk areas or “hot spots” where there is ongoing violence); 
● Communities with high numbers of IDPs and IDP returnees; 
● Community and/or local partners that demonstrate interest and commitment to 
implementing reconciliation activities; 
● Commitment by local governments to support/maintain interventions; and 
● The avoidance of duplication of effort. 


 

The Applicants will provide sufficient analysis of the targeted populations and proposed 
interventions for USAID/Nigeria to conclude that there is no reasonable basis to believe that 
Boko Haram/ISIS-WA would benefit from USG assistance under the Activity in violation of the 
material support prohibitions under 18 USC§§ 2339A and B, U.S. sanctions under Executive 
Order 13224, or United Nations Security Council sanctions. 

 

IV MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING 

Performance management and managing for results are critical to ensure that USAID is 
accountable to stakeholders in the U.S. and Nigeria. It will be critical for Applicants to 
demonstrate an understanding between outputs, targets, outcomes, and expected results; and to 
develop appropriate indicators to track progress toward development goals. By the end of the 
Water for Agriculture Activity, the Recipient will be expected to demonstrate the achievement 
not just of outputs, but also outcomes, and ultimately the Activity purpose and goal. 

 

USAID/Nigeria will ensure oversight of the Activity. Monitoring mechanisms to conduct 
regular site visits will be done as appropriate and feasible in accordance with ADS 201 and 303. 
Performance of construction risk management and mitigation measures will be monitored as part 
of the Activity performance monitoring. The Agency’s Engineering Division of E3/Engineering 
& Infrastructure, will provide support in the identification of construction, screening of risk, and 
risk mitigation and monitoring. They will provide technical assistance, review, and concurrence 
in the planning, solicitation and implementation phases of the Activity. 

 

To measure implementation progress, the Awardee will submit a Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning (MEL) Plan that will outline the targets, expected outcomes and results, deliverables, 
and indicators of measurement. Modifications to the MEL Plan will be made in consultation 
with USAID/Nigeria. The Activity must use a variety of systems and tools, including 
geographic information systems (GIS) mapping, to monitor progress of interventions. 

 


The indicators provided below are illustrative and intended to point to measurable, tangible 
outputs and outcomes that the Activity will be accountable to monitor and seek to improve. All 
indicators will be disaggregated by sex and by age, wherever possible. Data will be 
disaggregated by geographic location and plotted through GIS systems. The Awardee must 
propose appropriate indicators to USAID. Final indicators are subject to USAID approval 
following award. 

Increase water access for agriculture and livestock consumption indicators 

● 4.5.2-41 – Number of water resources sustainability assessments (WRSA) undertaken 
● 4.5.2-2 – Number of hectares under improved technologies or management practices as a 
result of USG assistance 
● EG.3-10,-11,-12 Yield of targeted agricultural commodities among program participants 
with USG assistance [IM-level] 
● EG.3.2 Number of individuals participating in USG food security programs [IM-level] 
● (EG.3.1-2) Hectares under new or improved/rehabilitated irrigation or drainage services 
as a of USG assistance. 


 

Strengthening Capacity for Water Governance and Management, and Improved Agricultural 
Practices 

● (HL.8.3-1) Number of people educated on tools, approaches, and/or methods for water 
security, integrated water resource management, and/or water source protection as a 
result of USG assistance. 
● (HL.8.3-2) Number of action plans implemented for water security, integrated water 
resource management, and/or water source protection. 
● EG.3.2-24 Number of individuals in the agriculture system who have applied improved 
management practices or technologies with USG assistance [IM-level] 
● EG.3.2-26 Value of annual sales of farms and firms receiving USG assistance [IM-level] 


 

The following indicator will be used to track this Activity’s second objective to mitigate conflicts 
amongst farmers and livestock herders: 

 

● Percentage of residents of USG-assisted communities satisfied with response to local 
conflicts by community conflict mitigation measures. 


 

V. IMPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLES AND GUIDANCE 

 

V.1 Multi-Stakeholder Coordination 

Applicants will design, develop, and implement interventions that create Multi-Stakeholder 
Groups to select potential water access sites. Multi-Stakeholder Groups will be composed of 


different government and non-government organizations and may be comprised of, for example, 
state and local government institutions, smallholder farmers’ cooperatives, civil society 
organization, and community based organizations. The Applicant will facilitate the creation of 
Multi-Stakeholder Groups to select communities and sites where potential water access points 
may be created and a feasibility assessment will determine a subset of communities where water 
access points will be created or refurbished. 

V.2 Coordination with Other Assistance Programs 

Applicants should coordinate with and leverage the efforts of other USAID/Nigeria, U.S. 
Government funded, and other donor activities to maximize impact and avoid duplication. 
Applicants shall explicitly identify opportunities for collaboration and leveraging in their 
technical approach. 

Opportunities already created by other USAID offices such as the Office of Transition Initiatives 
(OTI) and Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) will be explored. Through 
ongoing support to multiple international NGO and UN agency partners, OFDA is providing 
vulnerable populations in northeastern Nigeria with improved access to vital agriculture, 
emergency food security programs, and life-saving nutrition resources. OFDA-funded 
agriculture and emergency food security activities aim to help displaced and conflict-affected 
farming communities improve their livelihoods, coping abilities, and access to nutritionally 
adequate and safe foods through distribution of tools, seeds, and cash grants for livelihood 
restoration; the formation and support of community producer groups; and the provision of 
training in improved agricultural techniques, animal health and livestock management, micro-
gardening, and seed multiplication and storage. OTI has provided seeds, tools, and tractor 
services to returning farmers in certain target LGAs in advance of the last two rainy seasons. 
Through its collaboration with Feed the Future Nigeria Livelihoods activity, it provided post-
harvest support (PIC bags) to some of the cooperatives in southern Borno that USAID assisted 
through a seed distribution intervention. The investments of other actors in this sector should 
incentivize, rather than discourage USAID to invest, as they will create space for USAID to 
focus and lead an innovative vision for economic recovery. 

USAID will leverage the work of the GON and other development partners that are currently 
active in the area, including the Department for International Development (DFID), the World 
Bank, the European Union (EU), the German Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and other UN agencies such as 
UNICEF. DFID’s humanitarian response aims at restarting agricultural activities, agricultural 
supply and offtake markets, and reducing the distortionary impacts of humanitarian aid on local 
markets. The World Bank’s ongoing efforts focus on interventions that aim to restore 
livelihoods and access to food, including road rehabilitation, technical assistance, and program 
management support that positively impact over 150,000 people, including forcibly displaced 
populations, host communities, and other conflict-affected communities in its target states. The 


World Bank plans to invest $5 million to help farming families combat the food security crisis in 
the region. The World Bank’s agricultural development activities also include restoring access 
to productive assets by providing agricultural inputs including, but not limited to, seeds of local 
staple crops, fertilizers, and tools. Other World Bank activities include service delivery 
restoration and infrastructure rehabilitation in the health, education, transport, water, and 
sanitation sectors. The European Union is attending to the immediate needs of people in the 
conflict-affected areas and is helping to restore basic services, stimulate employment, and create 
livelihood opportunities, particularly for women and youth. 

The UNDP and other UN agencies are also present in the Northeast. The United Nations Food 
and Agricultural Organization implements a program on Food Security and Livelihood Support 
for the Most Vulnerable Households Affected by the Insurgency, and UNICEF is strengthening 
water supply systems and health facilities, including immunization services, in 12 host 
communities in Maiduguri. By the end of 2016, UNICEF provided 40 pit latrines for use by 
about 2,000 people and 10 motorized hand pumps to supply water to more than 7,000 people. 
This Activity has helped to reduce open defecation and improve sanitation in the target 
communities, reducing the risk of disease such as cholera and infection. 

Several state governments are undertaking local water systems development efforts in the 
Northeast. Six earth dams are currently under construction and at various stages of completion 
in Adamawa State. The State Government also recently proposed establishing six irrigation 
schemes (in addition to the existing irrigation facilities) that will improve food production over 
7,550 hectares of land. Similarly, Borno State has earth dams in all 23 of its LGAs for irrigation 
and livestock farming. The implementing partner will coordinate with relevant government 
agencies and align its intervention with these ongoing efforts. 

At the national level, the GON is currently implementing its Agricultural Promotion Policy 
(APP). To ensure that USAID’s agricultural interventions align with the GON’s priorities as 
outlined in the APP, the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development has assigned 
eight desk officers to liaise with USAID in the implementation of all USAID/Nigeria Feed the 
Future activities. These desk officers are also undertaking field visits with USAID and 
implementing partner representatives to monitor Activity interventions, report back to the 
Ministry and provide the Ministry’s feedback to USAID. The Activity shall engage with these 
Desk Officers as appropriate. 

V.3 Sustainability 

 

The Water for Agriculture Activity should build in sustainability from the start by strengthening 
the capacity for water governance and management of local government institutions and 
communities, Agricultural Development Program (ADP), WUAs (who are smallholder Farmer 
Cooperatives and livestock herders), and private sector actors that will continue to support and 
sustain Water for Agriculture-related work beyond the life of the award. Applicants must 


demonstrate their understanding of the challenging contexts that may undermine the efforts to 
achieve sustainability outcomes. Investment in small-scale water retention structure is crucial to 
sustain the food security and livelihoods of smallholder farmers as well as livestock herders. The 
success of this project will be determined by governance and socio-cultural contexts. 
Applicants must also demonstrate a good knowledge of the local context in planning and 
implementing this Activity which will result in equitable access to irrigation schemes among 
smallholder farmers and adequate water for livestock herders. The awardee is expected to 
develop a cost recovery approach in which Farmers’ Cooperatives and Water User Associations 
charge for providing extension information or for the provision of water. 

 

Active engagement of the local community is important for the long-term viability and 
sustainability of this Activity. State and local government officials, local authorities, community 
leaders, and women will be publicly engaged in a transparent selection process to help choose 
appropriate installation sites, operate and manage the activities, and help select the type of 
technologies applied in order to secure their support for the Activity and improve its 
sustainability. The awardee is expected to develop the site selection framework in coordination 
with relevant state and local GON agencies. Successful interventions will provide appropriate 
technology and an approach that fits with traditional existing livelihoods opportunities and the 
ability to manage or maintain water access points over time and increase agricultural production. 

 

V.4 Construction Risk Management 

 

The Applicant will incorporate principle elements of USAID’s preferred approach to 
construction as outlined in USAID’s Construction Risk Management policy – A Mandatory 
Reference for ADS Chapter 201. 

 

 

V.5 Gender Equality And Social Inclusion 

 

USAID’s Automated Directive System (ADS) states, “Gender issues are central to the 
achievement of strategic plans and Assistance Objectives (AO), and USAID strives to promote 
gender equality, in which both men and women have equal opportunity to benefit from and 
contribute to economic, social, cultural and political development, enjoy socially valued 
resources and reward, and realize their human rights” (ADS 201.3.9.3). 

 

In addition to gender, the Activity will consider the role and inclusion of ethnic minorities, 
religious minorities, and people with disabilities. The Recipient will assess and identify gender 
dynamics and social inclusion issues that affect the participation and disparate needs of different 
genders and minority groups in activities under this program. The Recipient is expected to 
examine gender roles (including how they may have changed during and post conflict), cultural 
perceptions, economic barriers, and other factors that influence genders’ and minority groups’ 


needs and participation in project activities. In addition, the Recipient must ensure that gender 
dynamics, gender-sensitivity, gender equality, and social inclusion issues are fully integrated into 
program components and will be required to undertake specific efforts to ensure that 
interventions do not discriminate against, cause harm to, or disproportionately benefit any gender 
or identity group. The Recipient is required to have equal participation of men and women in all 
aspects of this program and ensure that minority communities are well represented and 
participate in all program activities and in the makeup of program staff. The Recipient should 
use clear gender targets, inclusion strategies, and measure the participation of different groups 
throughout the life of the program. All data collected about people should be disaggregated by 
sex, age category, and ethnicity. Gender analysis will be conducted before interventions begin 
and in concert with the submission of the work plan, which will be due 45 days after the contract 
is signed. 

USAID encourages applications that demonstrate the use of data and evidence, appropriate 
technology, and innovation at the activity-level and the participation of the private sector across 
the program, as appropriate. 

V.6 Conflict Sensitive Programming and Do No Harm 

 

Conflict between pastoralists and farmers has a long history in Nigeria, as it is often linked to 
competition for natural resources like pasture and water. The design team recognizes the issue of 
farmers-herders conflict in the target region, and the need to address conflict resolution needs, as 
well as training and capacity needs. A conflict assessment will be conducted at the start of the 
Activity to understand local conflict dynamics related to the scope of the Activity and to ensure 
flexibility in incorporating recommendations that will mitigate, and avoid increasing, conflict. 
Emphasis will be placed on the realities and changing dynamics of farming and livestock 
keeping in the area, including: (i) most households, even those that practice crop agriculture, are 
dependent on livestock, (ii) livestock losses are suffered by both farmers and pastoralists, (iii) 
significant losses and insecurity have changed the nature of herding, with farmers and smaller 
pastoralists contracting hired herders to keep and move with livestock, (iv) herders tend to gather 
together in large herds when the security situation is unstable, (v) there is a relationship between 
conflict actors like ISIL/WA and large herds, including taxes, livestock thefts, and ancillary 
businesses associated with conflict actors integrated into or following herds. Care will be taken 
to limit the spread of agriculture, particularly irrigated crop production, as the most suitable land 
is often riparian areas that are crucial to grazing. The local pastoral code, corridors and grazing 
set asides will be important conflict resolution tools. 

 

Applicants must demonstrate an understanding of the nuances of the socio- economic challenges 
that the ISIS-WA and Boko-Haram insurgencies created in northeastern Nigeria. This Activity 
will assess risks resulting from bringing resources into communities that may have ongoing 
conflict dynamics related to the interventions in the scope of this Activity, or may develop due 
to the Activity. The Activity will use a conflict lens in the design of interventions, first, to “do 


no harm”; second to mitigate rather than fuel conflict; and third, to create a positive peace-
building environment. Conflict assessment will be conducted before interventions begin and in 
concert with the submission of the work plan in each target LGA/target community, which will 
be due 45 days after the award is signed. Subsequent assessments will follow based on the 
results of the first assessment and the evolving situation on the ground throughout the 
development of the Activity. 

 

V.7 Mitigating Measures 

 

The implementing partner must demonstrate an understanding of the risks of terrorist financing 
in working in Boko Haram and ISIS-WA-affected communities in Adamawa and Borno States 
and present a plan to mitigate any such risk associated with the proposed Activity. It will also 
provide a plan to conduct a security assessment prior to the Activity’s launch of interventions. 
This assessment will reflect findings from key stakeholders in the area, and justify a conclusion 
that the beneficiary communities are at a low risk of re-invasion. The Applicant must outline in 
the proposal how its employees will be vetted to ensure no current or former Boko Haram and 
ISIS-WA affiliation. The Applicant will show how it will ensure that there are no known Boko 
Haram and ISIS-WA members currently residing in the area where Activity interventions will be 
implemented prior to implementation. Additionally, the implementing partner will show how it 
will work with state authorities (including the State Emergency Management Agency) and 
community leaders to screen any potential beneficiaries to ensure that they do not include any 
Boko Haram and ISIS-WA affiliates. No payment or training will be provided to security forces 
or police as part of this Activity. 

 

Importantly, the implementing partner should note that it will facilitate the private sale of 
agricultural inputs instead of distributing them. In-kind goods and equipment must not be 
distributed to individuals or groups of smallholder farmers as part of this intervention. No 
payment or training will be provided to security forces or police as part of this Activity. 

 

V.8 Environmental Compliance And Management 

 

This Activity is covered under an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for the Water for 
Agriculture was approved on August 7, 2014 that expires on December 31, 2019. A follow-on 
IEE will be initiated before the expiration of the current IEE to take effect January 1, 2020, and 
last until December 31, 2024. The construction of water catchments and small-scale irrigation 
technologies to provide water for irrigation and livestock has a negative determination with 
conditions as per 22 CFR 216.3 (a) (2) (iii). Therefore, the awardee must produce an 
Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) prior to Activity implementation. 

 


Environmental and climate risk analyses will be conducted before interventions begin and in 
concert with the submission of the work plan, which will be due 45 days after the contract is 
signed. 

[END SECTION A] 

 

 

 

 


SECTION B – FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. ESTIMATE OF FUNDS AVAILABLE AND NUMBER OF AWARDS 
CONTEMPLATED 

 

USAID intends to award a single Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $8 million in total USAID funding over a three-year period. 

 

2. START DATE AND PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE FOR FEDERAL AWARDS 

 

The anticipated period of performance is three (3) years. The estimated start date will be on or 
about the date the award is signed. 

 

3. SUBSTANTIAL INVOLVEMENT 


 

Award under this NOFO will be a Cooperative Agreement. Potential applicants should note that 

USAID policy prohibits the payment of fee/profit to the recipients under assistance instruments. 

 

Consistent with ADS 303.3.11, USAID/Nigeria will be substantially involved in the 
implementation of the Water For Agriculture Activity. The intended purpose of the Agreement 
Officer’s Representative (AOR) involvement during the implementation of the program is to 
assist the recipient in achieving the supported objectives. It is expected that the Agreement 
Officer will delegate the following approvals to the AOR: 

 

(a) Approval of the Recipient's Implementation Plan 


 

USAID will approve annual work plans and the life-of-project exit strategy, and any subsequent 
revisions. If the AO has delegated authority to the AOR to approve implementation plans, the 
AOR must review the agreement’s terms and conditions to ensure that changes to the terms and 
conditions are not inadvertently approved by the AOR. 

 

The following documents are required for the implementation plan: 

 

• Standard Procurement Procedures for Architectural & Engineering (A&E) and 
Construction firms contracting 
• Construction Health and Safety Plan 
• Construction Schedule (e.g. Gantt Chart) 
• Quality Management Plan - Including Quality Assurance and Quality Control for Both 
Design and Construction Phases 
• Plan for Initial Environmental Examination and Climate Risk Management 
• Organizational Chart or Staffing Plan 
• Timeline for O&M plan 


 

 

(b) Approval of Specified Key Personnel 


 


USAID may designate as key personnel only those positions that are essential to the successful 
implementation of the Recipient’s program. USAID’s policy limits this to a reasonable number 
of positions, generally no more than five positions or five percent of Recipient employees 
working under the award, whichever is greater. 

 

(c) Agency and Recipient Collaboration or Joint Participation 


 

When the Recipient's successful accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from 
USAID's technical knowledge, the AO may authorize the collaboration or joint participation of 
USAID and the Recipient on the program. There should be sufficient reason for Agency 
involvement and the involvement should be specifically tailored to support identified elements in 
the program description. When these conditions are met, the AO may include appropriate levels 
of substantial involvement such as the following: 

 

i. Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, if the 
program will establish an advisory committee that provides advice to the 
Recipient. USAID may participate as a member of this committee as well. 
Advisory committees must only deal with programmatic or technical issues and 
not routine administrative matters. 


 

ii. Concurrence on the substantive provisions of sub-awards. 2 CFR 200.308 already 
requires the Recipient to obtain the AO’s prior approval for the sub-award, 
transfer, or contracting out of any work under an award. This is generally limited 
to approving work by a third party under the agreement. If USAID wishes to 
reserve any further approval rights for sub-awards or contracts, it must clearly 
spell out such Agency involvement in the substantial involvement provision of the 
agreement. 


 

iii. Approval of the Recipient's Activity Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) 
Plan. 


 

iv. Monitor to authorize specified kinds of direction or redirection because of 
interrelationships with other projects. All such activities must be included in the 
program description, negotiated in the budget, and made part of the award. 


 

(d) Agency Authority to Immediately Halt a Construction Activity 


 

The AO may immediately halt a construction activity if identified specifications are not met. In 
such cases, the AO will attach the identified specifications to the award when it is being 
executed. Any material changes to the specifications must be treated as an amendment to the 
award. 

 

An award shall be made only when the Agreement Officer makes a positive determination that 
the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management competence in 
planning and carrying out assistance programs and that it will practice mutually agreed upon 
methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by USAID. For organizations that 


are new to USAID, or organizations with outstanding audit findings, it may be necessary to 
perform a pre-award survey in accordance with ADS 303.3.9 and ADS 591.3.4.2. 

 

4. AUTHORIZED GEOGRAPHIC CODE 


 

The authorized USAID Principal Geographic Code for the procurement of commodities and 
services under this award is 937, defined as the United States, the recipient country, and 
developing countries other than advanced developing countries, but excluding any country that is 
a prohibited source. Procurement of vehicles and pharmaceuticals and other restricted 
commodities are subject to the limitations in 22 CFR 228, ADS 312, and ADS 310 and may 
require a waiver or Agreement Officer’s approval. 

 

For accurate identification of prohibited sources, please refer to 22 CFR 228 and Automated 

Directive System (ADS) 310 entitled “Source and Nationality Requirements for Procurement of 

Commodities and Services Financed by USAID. 

 

5. NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN USAID AND THE RECIPIENT 


 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Water For 
Agriculture Program which is authorized by Federal statute. The successful Recipient will be 
responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives and the efficient and 
effective administration of the award through the application of sound management practices. 
The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent 
with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and conditions of the Federal 
award. 

6. TITLE TO PROPERTY 


Property title under the resultant agreement(s) will vest with the Recipient in accordance with the 
requirements of 2 CFR 200.313, or with the Cooperating Country consistent with Required as 
Applicable Standard Provisions contained in the award. 

 

 

[END SECTION B] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted however, local organizations are encouraged to apply 
and international organizations are encouraged to seek local partners. 

 

Qualified U.S. and non-U.S. organizations (other than those from foreign policy restricted 
countries) are eligible to apply under this NOFO. Potential for-profit Applicants should note that, 
in accordance with 2 CFR 200.400(g), profit, which is any amount in excess of allowable direct 
and indirect costs, is not an allowable cost for Recipients of USAID assistance awards, and 
cannot be part of the activity budget. However, the prohibition against profit does not apply to 
procurement contracts made under the assistance instrument when the Recipient procures goods 
and services in accordance with the Procurement Standards found in 2 CFR 200.317 to 326. 

 

USAID welcomes applications from organizations which have not previously received financial 
assistance from USAID. 

 

Applicants must have established financial management, monitoring and evaluation processes, 
internal control systems, and policies and procedures that comply with established U.S. 
Government standards, laws, and regulations. The successful Applicant(s) will be subject to a 
responsibility determination assessment (possibly including a pre-award survey) by the 
Agreement Officer (AO). 

 

The Recipient must be a responsible entity. The AO may determine a pre-award survey is 
required to conduct an examination that will determine whether the prospective Recipient has 
the necessary organization, experience, accounting and operational controls, and technical skills 
– or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the objectives of the program and comply with 
the terms and conditions of the award. 

 

2. COST SHARING OR MATCHING 

 

No cost-sharing (matching) is required hereunder. 

 

3. OTHER ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 

 

Application must respond directly to the terms, conditions, and provisions of this NOFO 
(including all portions of the program description). 

 

All applications received by the deadline will be reviewed for responsiveness and programmatic 
merit in accordance with the specifications outlined in Section D below. Applications should 
respond directly to the terms, conditions, specifications and provisions of this NOFO (including 
all portions of the program description). Applications that do not meet the requirements of this 
NOFO will not be considered for award. 

 

[END SECTION C] 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

A. USAID/NIGERIA POINT OF CONTACT 

 

1. Name: Cheryl Hodge-Snead 








 Title: Agreement Officer 

 Email: abujasolicitations@usaid.gov 

 Mail Address: N/A 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted in writing to abujasolicitations@usaid.gov 
no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter. Any information given to a 
prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be furnished promptly to all other prospective 
applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that information is necessary in submitting 
applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any other prospective applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

 

• Name of the organization(s) submitting the application; 
• Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address); 
• Program name 
• Notice of Funding Opportunity number 
• Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 


evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● The applications must be written in English language. 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive 
page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 12 
point Times New Roman requirement. 
● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be submitted 
in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 


 

● The Cover letter, Cover page, Tabs/dividers, Table of Contents, Acronym list, Executive 
Summary, and Attachment do not count against the 25-page limitation. Any page in the 
technical application that contains a table, chart, or graph, not otherwise excluded above, is 
subject to the page limitation. 


 

● All information from appendices must be referenced in the technical application and 
summarized and included in the attach section. All critical information from 
appendices/attachment clearly identified and summarized in the technical application will be 
evaluated as part of the basis of award. 


 

● Additional documentation beyond the 25-page limit and the referenced attachments will not 
be read or evaluated by USAID. 


 

● Budget Narrative: Accompanying budget notes/narrative must explain the basis of all unit 
costs in each line item. The explanation must identify the factors upon which each estimate is 
based and show the arithmetic in reaching the cost figure. 


 

● The Cost Schedule must include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no hidden 
formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in addition to 
the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost application 
submission is the unlocked Excel version. 


 

 


Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants 
should retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor 
considered/may be considered at the discretion of the Agreement Officer. Applicants must retain 
proof of timely delivery in the form of system generated documentation of delivery receipt date 
and time/confirmation from the receiving office/certified mail receipt. 

 

Applications must be submitted by email to abujasolicitations@usaid.gov. Email submissions 
must include the NOFO number and applicant’s name in the subject line heading. In addition, 
for an application sent by multiple emails, the subject line must also indicate whether the email 
relates to the technical or cost application, and the desired sequence of the emails and their 
attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if your cost application is being sent in two 
emails, the first email should have a subject line that states: "[NOFO number], [organization 
name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted 
as consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate 
in the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the 
same email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a 
"corrected" email. 

 

Applicants are reminded that e-mail is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to 
the government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 

 

There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Nigeria cannot guarantee 
their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 10MB in total file/data size per 
e-mail. 

 

Uploading to Grants.gov: 

 


Applicants may upload applications to http://www.grants.gov. USAID bears no responsibility for 
data errors resulting from transmission or conversion processes associated with electronic 
submissions. 

 

5. Technical Application Format 

 

The technical application must be concise, comprehensive, and responsive to the instructions 
contained herein. Applicants must take into account the merit review criteria in Section E of 
this NOFO. The technical application must clearly demonstrate how the proposed approach will 
meet the goals and all objectives of the activity, and fulfill the Applicant’s program 
implementation responsibilities. 

 

The application must contain information that demonstrates the Applicant’s understanding of 
the program description and must be prepared in such a manner as to enable the review 
committees to make a thorough evaluation and arrive at a sound determination of whether the 
application responds to the NOFO. 

 

Unnecessarily elaborate brochures or other presentations beyond those sufficient to present a 
complete and effective application in response to this NOFO are not desired and may be 
construed as an indication of the Applicant’s lack of cost consciousness. Elaborate art work and 
expensive visual or other presentation aids are neither necessary nor wanted. 

 

The format and presentation of technical approach is below: 

 

(a) Cover Letter; 
(b) Table of Contents; 
(c) Executive Summary; 
(d) Technical Approach; 
(e) Key Personnel and Staffing Plan; 
(f) Institutional Capacity and Management Plan; 
(g) Past Performance; and, 
(h) Attachments as applicable): 
• Draft Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan; 
• Draft Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan; 
• Organizational Chart(s); 
• Staffing Plan including skills matrix; 
• Key Personnel Position Descriptions; 
• Key Personnel CV/Resumes; 
• Past Performance Information; and, 
• Security Operational Plan. 


 

NOTE: Applicants will determine the type of information to be submitted as attachments to 
their technical application in response to the instructions provided in the NOFO. The list 
provided above is not all-inclusive. 

 

(a) Cover Page (does not count against 25-page limit) 


 


Include the Applicant’s name submitting the application and the organization’s DUNS number. 
Major sub-awardees (hereafter referred to as “subs”) must be clearly identified, along with their 
DUNS numbers; major subs are defined as those expected to perform at least 20 percent of the 
Applicant’s total proposed budget, or a prominent part of the technical effort. Include a contact 
person for the application, including his/her name (both typed and signed), title or position with 
the organization, address, telephone, and email address. Also state whether the contact person is 
the authorized representative with authority to negotiate the award, and if not, that person should 
also be clearly identified. (See Section D.3 above for more requirements). 

 

(b) Table of Contents (does not count against 25-page limit) 

 

Include major sections and page numbering to easily cross-reference and identify merit review 
criteria. 

 

c) Executive Summary (One page, does not count against 25-page limit ) 


 

The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical 
Application. 

 

d) Technical Approach (no more than 25 pages) - [See Section E.1.a.1] 


 

The application provides a clear vision and effective operational strategy and techniques for 
accomplishing the stated goal, purpose, and expected results outlined in this NOFO, describing 
conflict mitigation issues and context in which Water for Agriculture will operate. The technical 
approach must propose proven, innovative, and cost effective approaches, including reference to 
evidence or other justification that proposed programmatic choices are likely to achieve 
sustainable impact. It is incumbent upon Applicants to demonstrate their familiarity with and 
understanding of the development landscape in the northeast and identify significant 
opportunities for partnership with a range of local organizations and impact. 

 

Specific focus should be given in developing a technically sound approach while integrating the 
following implementation principles: 1) multi-stakeholder coordination; 2) coordination with 
other Assistance Programs; 3) build in sustainability from the beginning; 4) integrate gender, 
youth, and social inclusion considerations into design and implementation; 5) ensure conflict 
sensitive programming and a Do No Harm approach; 6) mitigation measures; 7) construction risk 
management; and 8) environmental Compliance And Management. 

 

e) Key personnel and Staffing Plan - [See Section E.1.a.II] 


 

e.1 Key Personnel: 

 

The applicant proposes Key Personnel who possess the required qualifications and have the 
knowledge, skills, and experience required to achieve the program results. The four Key 
Personnel positions consist of one Chief of Party (COP), one Deputy Chief of Party 
(DCOP)/Infrastructure Specialist, one Senior Agronomist, and one Monitoring and 
Evaluation Specialist. These positions are considered essential to the work being performed due 


to their skills and position within the Water for Agriculture activity implementation team. Once 
included in a signed award, Key Personnel may not be replaced by the Recipient without the 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. The Recipient must recruit and establish a team of 
experts and support staff to develop and implement the activity and to manage its central and 
local elements including short‐term consulting and coordination with stakeholders and partners. 

Chief of Party: Based in Adamawa, the COP will be the direct link with the AOR and other 
relevant stakeholders such as government partners and accountable for achieving Water for 
Agriculture results. The COP is expected to have the strategic vision, leadership qualities, depth 
and breadth of technical expertise and experience, a solid professional reputation, management 
experience, interpersonal skills and written and oral presentation skills to fulfill the diverse 
technical and managerial requirements of the program description. Given the complexity and 
scope of this activity, it is critical that the COP exhibit effective personnel management, 
coordination, and decision making skills along with an ability to troubleshoot. Additionally 

• The COP must have at least (10) years of demonstrated experience on similar 
projects, 
• S/he must have an advanced degree ( a university degree higher than a bachelor’s 
degree) in engineering, water or natural resource management, public 
administration/management or other relevant fields; 
• S/he must have demonstrated experience in institutional strengthening, capacity 
building, and market-based approaches to water infrastructure for agriculture; 
• S/he must have experience managing diverse teams of staff; 
• S/he must have exceptional communication and collaboration skills and a proven 
track record of interacting with other projects and international agencies; 
• S/he must have a proven track record of working effectively with diverse groups of 
civil society organizations, media, civil society, and government counterparts; 
• S/he must be fluent in English. 


 

Deputy Chief of Party/ Infrastructure Specialist: The Deputy Chief of Party oversees the 
operation and programmatic aspects of the Water for Agriculture. S/he will be the lead technical 
person providing leadership to the overall technical direction of the Activity. S/he will be 
responsible for the assessment of the institutional requirements, agreements and arrangements, 
informed by the technical and operational requirements of the schemes in their newly designed 
and rehabilitated form. S/he will work with other members of the team to define operations and 
maintenance schedules, assess and motivate pricing of irrigation service charges, institutionalize 
water scheduling modalities, and assign suitable roles and responsibilities to different WUA 
levels. S/he will provide technical input to the WUA training program, including quality control 
processes and internal monitoring and analysis. Additionally: 

• The DCOP candidate must have a Master’s degree in the field of water management, 
irrigation engineering or related field; 
• S/he must have at least 5 years of practical experience in the design and 
implementation of agriculture irrigation, water retention storage for irrigation and 
livestock, and water management systems; 
• S/he must have excellent management skills, including the ability to manage 
multidisciplinary teams. 


 


Senior Agronomist: The Senior Agronomist will manage implementation of the agricultural 
productivity component of the activity. S/He will work closely with the Farmers’ Cooperatives 
and Livestock Herders’ groups. They will provide guidance on how to improve crop yields and 
livestock productivity. They will discern the best ways to plant, harvest, and cultivate the plants 
based on the climate in the Northeast. They will develop methods to control weeds and pests to 
keep crops disease-free. Additionally: 

• S/he must have a Master’s degree in Agronomy, Agricultural Economics; 
• S/he must have 7 years of professional experience in developing countries, in 
agriculture economics, agriculture policy, agribusiness, agronomy, agriculture 
extension, or market development; 
• S/he must have strong knowledge of sustainable livelihoods approaches and 
experience working with Farmers organizations and/or agricultural cooperatives; 
• S/he must have good crop management and understanding of soil fertility and water 
management in the sub-Saharan African context; 
• S/he must have excellent communication and writing skills; 
• S/he must be fluent in English. 


 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist: This individual will lead Collaborating, Learning and 
Adapting (CLA) activities for the activity. S/he will make operational decisions and manage the 
various components of the program dealing with M&E, will oversee data collection efforts and 
ensure both the M&E system and results reporting meet the requirements of the Water for 
Agriculture initiative. The individual will lead a system for continuous communication with 
relevant partners, and demonstrate an ability to take critical inputs, feedback, and assessments 
from evaluation partners to inform changes in program approaches and scale-up. The individual 
shall ensure that these and other program components are results-oriented. This individual will 
have a major focus on achieving results in all areas assuring that the implementation team 
members are poised to deliver services on schedule. 

 

• S/he must have a bachelor degree in Agriculture or a related field; 
• S/he must have 5 years of monitoring and evaluation work at the supervisory level 
preferred; 
• S/he must have experience designing and overseeing M&E data collection and 
reporting for water for agriculture/food security project; 
• S/he must have demonstrated ability to create and manage information data bases 
using appropriate software application; 
• S/he must have the ability to work in team environment and work with and train non-
direct reports to implement program; 
• S/he must have the ability to effectively use geographic information systems; 
• S/he must have strong writing, reporting, and presentational skills. 


 

e.2 Staffing Plan 

The applicant has the ultimate responsibility for managing the activity to achieve Water for 
Agriculture purpose, including determining the appropriate staffing pattern to support its 
technical approach. The staffing plan must include a team with the required knowledge and 
experience to achieve the intended results of this NOFO program. The team in addition to being 


water and agriculture specialists must also have expertise in, and access to specialists in diverse 
areas such as peace building, reconciliation, conflict mitigation and capacity building sectors. In 
addition, project personnel should be capable of handling government counterparts and other 
stakeholders and be well experienced in local context. The staffing pattern will reflect the 
minimum number of highly experienced technical staff sufficient to manage and implement the 
award activities. USAID intends the Water for Agriculture activity to have a sufficient qualified 
core of full-time staff on site responsible for planning, designing, managing, and implementing 
the Water for Agriculture activity. Short-term technical experts who can support in-country long-
term personnel in the identification of promising and innovative project models may supplement 
the staff. The applicant’s staffing plan should be gender inclusive and conflict sensitive. 

f) Institutional Capacity and Management Plan - [See Section D.5.e. III] 


 

• Institutional capacity 


 

The applicant describes its organizational capabilities, expertise, and experience in project 
implementation that given the complexity and security situation of Northeast Nigeria. Applicants 
are to develop a set of targeted responses that reflect local realities and socio-cultural values and 
practices. Applicants are to demonstrate capacity to manage engineering design and construction 
implementation. Applicants are to put in place a flexible management system that will support 
rapid mobilization and response, and a diverse range of interventions suited to the profile of the 
different target groups and districts. Furthermore, Applicants are also to propose strategies that 
allow for the rapid and flexible retargeting of resources in response to new threats and 
opportunities as per the organizational capabilities and expertise of the applicant and of sub-
recipients in the technical areas identified in the Program Description. The Applicant describes 
the organizational capabilities and expertise of any proposed sub-recipients and demonstrates 
how the partner organization(s) will be utilized and how the complementarity of their skill sets 
will be represented in the partnership. The applicant identifies the proposed field management 
structure and financial controls. The technical application explains the core technical 
capacities/resources and home office support, and the applicant’s financial control system. 

 

• Management Plan 


 

The applicant must describe the applicant’s executive management functions and the 
tools/methods that will be applied to ensure cost efficient, responsive and effective financial, 
technical and administrative management of the project, its consortium partners, and sub-
awardees. This will highlight the management structure, defined functions, and the management 
and decision making authorities of the Applicant. Applicants will also identify: internal quality 
controls for technical and financial management; specific approaches that will ensure cost-
efficiency and maximize the development impact for US taxpayer dollars spent under this 


NOFO; home office capacity for monitoring performance and early identification and resolution 
of staffing concerns or programmatic challenges in meeting timelines, benchmarks and 
deliverables. 

Applicant will also describe demonstrated capability in assembling high quality technical 
assistance teams, including identifying and utilizing Nigerian technical expertise, and placing 
them in the field in a timely manner and providing them with all necessary support. This ability 
must be evidenced by organizational commitment and organizational systems designed to utilize 
consortium members and Nigerian firms/individuals as appropriate. 

Applicants will also describe how they will incorporate principle elements of USAID’s preferred 
approach to construction into the program, including their approach to construction oversight and 
quality assurance. (See Construction Risk Management: A Mandatory Reference for ADS 
Chapter 201 - https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/200/201maw) 

g) Past Performance - [See Section D.5.e. IV] 


 

The applicant provides its performance implementing U.S. Government and/or privately funded 
contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements for peace building and reconciliation related 
programming in the three years prior to this application. The applicant will include a list of the 
Applicant’s (prime) and their implementing partners’ grants, or cooperative agreements 
involving similar or related programs over the past three years (include the location(s), name and 
current telephone number and/or email address of at least one person knowledgeable of the 
Applicant’s work on each such program, award numbers for each program (if available), and a 
brief description of the work performed.) 

USAID will consider the information provided by the applicant, as well as information obtained 
from other sources, when evaluating the applicant’s past performance and will determine the 
relevance of similar past performance information. The U.S. Government reserves the right to 
contact references and to obtain other information from any and all sources inside or outside the 
U.S. Government for use in the evaluation of past performance. 

USAID will conduct a merit review all applications received that complies with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following 
criteria shown in descending order of importance: 

 

7. Business (Cost) Application Format 


 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as 
concise as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application 
must illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 


Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.205. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below 
this listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 














 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 

(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 


itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time 
required to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. The Budget 
Narrative must contain sufficient detail to allow USAID to understand the proposed costs. The 
applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address any additional requirements identified in 
Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget Narrative must be thorough, including 
sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that the proposed costs are fair and 
reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

• Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Section H, Annex 1 for 
Summary Budget Template 
• Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
• Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding and cost share, broken out 
by budget category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in 
other activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 
of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale 
used and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown comprised of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 



policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – 
Must include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per 
unit and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and 
supplies and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of 
any rental costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable 
property, if any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life 
expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200.330 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is 
a subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction and Capacity building Training Costs 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of 
costs. Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200.414. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide 
the applicable supporting information. Below are the most commonly used Indirect Cost 
Rate methods: 


 

Method 1 - Direct Charge Only 

Eligibility: Any applicant 

Initial Application Requirements: See above on direct costs 

 

Method 2 - Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (NICRA) 

Eligibility: Any applicant with a NICRA issued by a USG Agency must use that NICRA 

Initial Application Requirements: If the applicant has a current NICRA, submit your 
approved NICRA and the associated disclosed practices. If your NICRA was issued by an 
Agency other than USAID, provide the contact information for the approving Agency. 
Additionally, at the Agency’s discretion, a provisional rate may be set forth in the award 
subject to audit and finalization. See USAID’s Indirect Cost Rate Guide for Non Profit 
Organizations for further guidance. 

 

Method 3 - De minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs (MTDC) 

Eligibility: Any applicant that has never received a NICRA 


Initial Application Requirements: Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or 
direct costs, but may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. If chosen, this 
methodology once elected must be used consistently for all Federal awards until such time as 
a non-Federal entity chooses to negotiate an indirect rate, which the non-Federal entity may 
apply to do at any time. The applicant must describe which cost elements it charges 
indirectly vs. directly. See 2 CFR 200.414(f) for further information. 

 

Method 4 - Indirect Costs Charged As A Fixed Amount 

Eligibility: Non U.S. non-profit organizations without a NICRA may request, but approval is 
at the discretion of the AO 

Initial Application Requirements: Provide the proposed fixed amount and a worksheet that 
includes the following: 

 

● Total costs incurred by the organization for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year. 
● Indirect costs (common costs that benefit the day-to-day operations of the organization, 
including categories such as salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel 
administration, and accounting, or that benefit and are identifiable to more than one 
program or activity, such as depreciation, rental costs, operations and maintenance of 
facilities, and telephone expenses) for the previous fiscal year and estimates for the 
current year 
● Proposed method for prorating the indirect costs equitably and consistently across all 
programs and activities of using a base that measures the benefits of that particular cost to 
each program or activity to which the cost applies. 


 

If the applicant does not have an approved NICRA and does not elect to utilize the 10% de 
minimis rate, the Agreement Officer will provide further instructions and may request additional 
supporting information, including financial statements and audits, should the application still be 
under consideration after the merit review. USAID is under no obligation to approve the 
applicant’s requested method. 

 

 

(9) Security Costs: The Applicant will provide a security budget for security costs as part of 
its application. The Security Plan and budget must delineate and justify for 
reasonableness all costs and provide a coherent, overall integrated security plan that 
demonstrates that the Applicant has undertaken a thoughtful review of their security 
needs and includes analysis of the various elements of a security plan. The security 
budget must be complete and include comprehensive budget notes. 

 

Applicants must consider any costs foreseen for security, as identified in Annex #5 “Sample 
Format for Initial Security Plan” to include security equipment, security related communication 
equipment, and guards required for program implementation. These costs must be included under 
“Other Direct Costs.” Security Costs must be clearly identified in the cost application in a 
separate budget line item and must be included as part of the overall Applicant’s cost application. 

 

e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 


Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of 
any cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

• Name of organization 
• DUNS Number 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
• Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
• Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.331(b) 
• Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

h) Dun and Bradstreet and SAM Requirements 


 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier (DUNS number) and System for Award Management (SAM) 
requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual or Federal awarding agency 
that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or has an exception approved 
by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required to: 

 

1. Provide a valid DUNS number for the applicant and all proposed sub-recipients; 
2. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to 
make the process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.sam.gov). 
3. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times 
during which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration 
by a Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are 
encouraged to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the 
requirements above by the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that 
the applicant is not qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making 
an award to another applicant. 

 


DUNS number: http://fedgov.dnb.com/webform 

SAM registration: http://www.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick 
Start Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

i) History of Performance 


 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, recent and relevant, as follows: 

• Name of the Awarding Organization; 

• Award Number; 

• Activity Title; 

• A brief description of the activity; 

• Period of Performance; 

• Award Amount; 

• Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3) years; and 

• Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the work at 
the organization for which the service was performed with complete current contact information 
including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed individual. 

 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general 
information on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information 
concerning an applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such 
information in its review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information 
and conduct a pre-award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

Applicants should use the format provided in Annex #4: Past Performance Information of 
the NOFO to document the detailed information as requested. The completed forms should 
be included in the application’s appendix/annex. 

 

j) Branding Strategy and Marking Plan 


 

It is a U.S. Federal statutory and regulatory requirement that all overseas programs, projects, 
activities, public communications, and commodities that USAID partially or fully funds under an 
assistance award or sub-award must be appropriately marked with the USAID identity. 

 

Pursuant to ADS 303.3.6.3.f and ADS 320.3.1.2, the apparently successful applicant will be 
requested to submit a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan that will have to be successfully 
negotiated before a cooperative agreement will be awarded. These plans shall be prepared in 
accordance with the guidance in ADS 320.3.1.2, 2 CFR 700.16 and the references therein. ADS 
Chapter 320 sections concerning "assistance" apply to this NOFO. ADS Chapter 320 sections 
concerning "acquisition" do not apply to this NOFO. ADS Chapter 320 can be found on the 
USAID website: http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/300/320. 


 

Please note that USAID/Nigeria has waived marking requirements for selected locations in 
Nigeria. A copy of the waiver notification to USAID/Nigeria Implementing Partners is provided 
as Annex #7 to this NOFO. 

 

The Branding Strategy and Marking Plan must not be included with the original application but 
will be provided only after a written request of the Agreement Officer. However, the cost of 
Branding and Marking must be included in the Cost Application. 

 

USAID/Nigeria does not intend to make an award without an approved Branding Strategy and 
Marking Plan. 

 














The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated into any resulting 
award 

 

Pre-Award Terms 

 

I. Branding Strategy – Assistance (June 2012) 


 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a "Branding 
Strategy," describing how the program, project, or activity is named and positioned, and 
how it is promoted and communicated to beneficiaries and host country citizens. 

 

b. The request for a Branding Strategy, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, 
confers no rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Branding Strategy within the time frame specified by 
the Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision and 
negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total Estimated 
Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

 e. The Branding Strategy must include, at a minimum, all of the following: 

 (1) All estimated costs associated with branding and marking USAID programs, 
such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so forth. 

 

2. The intended name of the program, project, or activity. 








 

i. USAID requires the applicant to use the “USAID Identity,” comprised of 
the USAID logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American 
people” as found on the USAID Web site at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding, unless Section VI of the RFA or APS 
states that the USAID Administrator has approved the use of an additional 
or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 













 

ii. USAID prefers local language translations of the phrase “made possible by 
(or with) the generous support of the American People” next to the USAID 
Identity when acknowledging contributions. 












 

iii. It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 












 

iv. If branding in the above manner is inappropriate or not possible, the 
applicant must explain how USAID's involvement will be showcased 
during publicity for the program or project. 












 

v. USAID prefers to fund projects that do not have a separate logo or identity 
that competes with the USAID Identity. If there is a plan to develop a 
separate logo to consistently identify this program, the applicant must 
attach a copy of the proposed logos. Section VI of the RFA or APS will 
state if an Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute 
logo, seal, or tagline. 












 

(3) The intended primary and secondary audiences for this project or program, including 
direct beneficiaries and any special target segments. 

 

(4) Planned communication or program materials used to explain or market the program 
to beneficiaries. 

 

(a) Describe the main program message. 


 

(ii) Provide plans for training materials, posters, pamphlets, public service 
announcement, billboards, Web sites, and so forth, as appropriate. 

 

(iii) Provide any plans to announce and promote publicly this program or project to 
host country citizens, such as media releases, press conferences, public events, 
and so forth. Applicant must incorporate the USAID Identity and the message, 
“USAID is from the American People.” 

(iv) Provide any additional ideas to increase awareness that the American people 
support this project or program. 

 

(5) Information on any direct involvement from host-country government or ministry, 
including any planned acknowledgement of the host-country government. 


 

(6) Any other groups whose logo or identity the applicant will use on program materials 
and related materials. Indicate if they are a donor or why they will be visibly 
acknowledged, and if they will receive the same prominence as USAID. 


 


f. The Agreement Officer will review the Branding Strategy to ensure the above information 
is adequately included and consistent with the stated objectives of the award, the 
applicant's cost data submissions, and the performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Branding Strategy will be included in and 
made part of the resulting grant or cooperative agreement. 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

II. Marking Plan – Assistance (June 2012) 


 

a. Applicants recommended for an assistance award must submit and negotiate a “Marking 
Plan,” detailing the public communications, commodities, and program materials, and 
other items that will visibly bear the “USAID Identity,” which comprises of the USAID 
logo and brandmark, with the tagline “from the American people.” The USAID Identity 
is the official marking for the Agency, and is found on the USAID Web site at 
http://www.usaid.gov/branding. Section VI of the RFA or APS will state if an 
Administrator approved the use of an additional or substitute logo, seal, or tagline. 

 

b. The request for a Marking Plan, by the Agreement Officer from the applicant, confers no 
rights to the applicant and constitutes no USAID commitment to an award. 

 

 c. Failure to submit and negotiate a Marking Plan within the time frame specified by the 
Agreement Officer will make the applicant ineligible for an award. 

 

d. The applicant must include all estimated costs associated with branding and marking 
USAID programs, such as plaques, stickers, banners, press events, materials, and so 
forth, in the budget portion of the application. These costs are subject to the revision 
and negotiation with the Agreement Officer and will be incorporated into the Total 
Estimated Amount of the grant, cooperative agreement or other assistance instrument. 

 

e. The Marking Plan must include all of the following: 

 

 (1) A description of the public communications, commodities, and program materials 
that the applicant plans to produce and which will bear the USAID Identity as part 
of the award, including: 

 (i) Program, project, or activity sites funded by USAID, including visible 
infrastructure projects or other sites physical in nature; 

 

 (ii) Technical assistance, studies, reports, papers, publications, audiovisual 
productions, public service announcements, Web sites/Internet activities, 
promotional, informational, media, or communications products funded by 
USAID; 

 

 (iii) Commodities, equipment, supplies, and other materials funded by USAID, 
including commodities or equipment provided under humanitarian 
assistance or disaster relief programs; and 

 


 (iv) It is acceptable to cobrand the title with the USAID Identity and the 
applicant's identity. 

 

 (v) Events financed by USAID, such as training courses, conferences, 
seminars, exhibitions, fairs, workshops, press conferences and other public 
activities. If the USAID Identity cannot be displayed, the recipient is 
encouraged to otherwise acknowledge USAID and the support of the 
American people. 

 

 (2) A table on the program deliverables with the following details: 

 

 (i) The program deliverables that the applicant plans to mark with the USAID 
Identity; 

 

 (ii) The type of marking and what materials the applicant will use to mark the 
program deliverables; 

 

 (iii) When in the performance period the applicant will mark the program 
deliverables, and where the applicant will place the marking; 

 

 (iv) What program deliverables the applicant does not plan to mark with the 
USAID Identity, and 

 

 (v) The rationale for not marking program deliverables. 

 

 (3) Any requests for an exemption from USAID marking requirements, and an 
explanation of why the exemption would apply. The applicant may request an 
exemption if USAID marking requirements would: 

 

 (i) Compromise the intrinsic independence or neutrality of a program or 
materials where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the 
program and materials. The applicant must identify the USAID 
Development Objective, Interim Result, or program goal furthered by an 
appearance of neutrality, or state why an aspect of the award is 
presumptively neutral. Identify by category or deliverable item, examples 
of material for which an exemption is sought. 

 

 (ii) Diminish the credibility of audits, reports, analyses, studies, or policy 
recommendations whose data or findings must be seen as independent. 
The applicant must explain why each particular deliverable must be seen 
as credible. 

 

 (iii) Undercut host-country government “ownership” of constitutions, laws, 
regulations, policies, studies, assessments, reports, publications, surveys or 
audits, public service announcements, or other communications. The 
applicant must explain why each particular item or product is better 
positioned as host-country government item or product. 


 

 (iv) Impair the functionality of an item. The applicant must explain how 
marking the item or commodity would impair its functionality. 

 

 (v) Incur substantial costs or be impractical. The applicant must explain why 
marking would not be cost beneficial or practical. 

 

 (vi) Offend local cultural or social norms, or be considered inappropriate. The 
applicant must identify the relevant norm, and explain why marking would 
violate that norm or otherwise be inappropriate. 

 

 (vii) Conflict with international law. The applicant must identify the applicable 
international law violated by the marking. 

 f. The Agreement Officer will consider the Marking Plan's adequacy and reasonableness 
and will approve or disapprove any exemption requests. The Marking Plan will be 
reviewed to ensure the above information is adequately included and consistent with the 
stated objectives of the award, the applicant's cost data submissions, and the 
performance plan. 

 

g. If the applicant receives an assistance award, the Marking Plan, including any approved 
exemptions will be included in and made part of the resulting grant or cooperative 
agreement, and will apply for the term of the award unless provided otherwise. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

k) Funding Restrictions 


 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.330 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction may be authorized under this award in accordance with relevant Standard 
Provisions. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the 
explicit written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Applicant will be reimbursed only for costs that benefit the program description and are 
allocable, allowable and reasonable. Pre-award costs may be reimbursed under the resulting 
award, but only with the prior specific written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.4 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 














Pre-Award Terms 

 


 k) Conflict Of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 


a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

 

 1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant 

 organization or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an 

 Agency official involved in the competitive award decision-making process 

 that could affect that Agency official’s impartiality. The term “conflict of 

 interest” includes situations in which financial or other personal considerations 
may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the obligations and 
duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

 2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits 

 an SF-424. Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict 

 of interest after submitting the application, the applicant must disclose the 

 conflict of interest to the AO no later than ten (10) calendar days following 

 discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are 
aware of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for 
this financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance 

funding opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving 

any such notification from the applicant. 

 

 

l) Security Plan 


 

The Applicant must submit a Security Plan as a part of their application. The Security Plan must 
be based on a credible threat analysis and risk assessment. The plan must provide a coherent, 
integrated security plan, which demonstrates that the Applicant has undertaken a thoughtful 
review of their security needs and includes analysis of the various elements of a security system 
showing how threats will be mitigated. 

 

The Security Plan must include a point of contact to answer questions or provide clarifications 
regarding security throughout the life of the program. The Applicant is encouraged to acquire 
professional advice from an expert of its choosing to assist in establishing an overall security 
plan/system. 

 

The security plan accompanied by the budget will be reviewed together with the technical and 
cost applications, and it needs to demonstrate that the security needs to successfully implement 
the program description as presented in the Applicant’s technical approach have been 
addressed/considered. 


 

A sample format for Initial Security Plan is included in this NOFO as Annex #5. 

 

(END OF PRE-AWARD TERM) 

 

[END SECTION D] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Merit Review Criteria 


 

The criteria presented below have been tailored to the requirements of this particular NOFO. 
Applicants should note that these criteria serve to: (a) identify the significant matters that 
Applicants should address in their applications; and (b) set the standard against which all 
applications will be evaluated. 

 

The following merit review criteria, presented by major category, will be evaluated and used to 
make an award decision. The Selection Committee (SC) will evaluate the various components of 
the application set forth below, in which Technical Approach is the most important criterion and 
the other three criteria are of lesser importance than Technical Approach (but these three are of 
equal importance to each other). All sub-criteria within these major categories are of equal 
importance. 

 

 

USAID will conduct a merit review of all applications received that comply with the instructions 
in this NOFO. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated in accordance with the following 
criteria shown in descending order of importance. 

Criteria 1: Technical Approach 

The extent to which the application demonstrates a clear and effective implementation strategy 
and techniques results and a nuanced understanding of conflict mitigation context in the 
northeast for accomplishing the stated goal, purpose, and expected outlined in the NOFO. 

 

Criteria 2: Key Personnel and Staffing Plan 

The Key personnel plan and staffing plan will be evaluated based on the following sub-criteria, 
in equal order of importance: 

Key personnel 

The extent to which the proposed key personnel meet the qualifications outlined in this NOFO, 
reflecting specific required skills and ability to meet minimum requirements of the PD. 

Staffing Plan 

The extent to which all other professional personnel positions are appropriate and logically 
connected to the implementation of the activity and achievement objectives. 

Criteria 3: Institutional Capacity and Management Plan 

The application will be evaluated based on institutional experience using the following sub-
factors: 


Institutional Capacity 

The extent to which the applicant demonstrates organizational experience for programs of similar 
size, scope, and duration within conflict areas. 

Management Plan 

The extent to which the applicant incorporated principle elements of USAID’s preferred 
approach to construction. 

Criteria 4: Past Performance 

The extent to which the applicant and its teaming partners, if any, demonstrate successful past 
performance in achieving results on similar programs. 

a) Business Review 


 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an 
award as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in 
accordance with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

Proposed cost share, if provided, will be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth in 
2 CFR 200.306, 2 CFR 700.10, and the Standard Provision "Cost Sharing (Matching)" for U.S. 
entities, or the Standard Provision "Cost Share" for non-U.S. entities. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.205). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.207). 

 

Besides the Technical Evaluation Criteria, the application will be assessed for cost effectiveness 
and realism and must therefore address the following: 

 

1. Cost Effectiveness and Realism: The proposed costs must be realistic, reasonable, 
complete, and allowable. The costs must be realistic for the effort and consistent with the 
technical components of the application. 

 


2. Adequacy of Budget Detail and Financial Feasibility: The proposed budget must be 
sufficient to support the proposed activities, and all proposed costs must be adequately supported 
by notes highlighting the key assumptions used in their determination. USAID reserves the right 
to determine the resulting level of funding for the Cooperative Agreement. 

 

[END OF SECTION E] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

a. Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have 
been appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While 
USAID anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential 
applicants are hereby notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 




 

b. The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government 
to the expenditure of public funds. 




 

c. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement(s) may be incurred before receipt of 
either a fully executed Agreement or a specific, written authorization from the Agreement 
Officer. 




 

d. Following selection for award and successful negotiations with the apparently successful 
Applicant, an electronic copy of the notice of the award signed by the Agreement Officer 
will be sent to the successful Applicant, which serves as the authorizing document. The 
Agreement Officer will only do so after making a positive responsibility determination 
that the Applicant possesses, or has the ability to obtain, the necessary management 
competence in planning and carrying out assistance programs and that it will practice 
mutually agreed upon methods of accountability for funds and other assets provided by 
USAID. 




 

e. The award will be issued to the contact as specified in the application as the Authorized 
Individual in accordance with the requirements in the Representations and Certifications. 
USAID reserves the right to perform a pre-award survey which may include, but is not 
limited to: 




 

(a) Interviews with individuals to establish their ability to perform agreement duties 
under the project conditions; 


 

(b) A review of the prime Recipient’s financial condition, business and personnel 
procedures, etc.; and 


 

(c) Site visits to the prime Recipient’s institution. 


 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

No deviations are currently contemplated to the standard provisions for the grant(s) or 
cooperative agreement(s) contemplated by this NOFO. 

 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations: 

 


• For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for 
U.S. Non-governmental organizations. 


 

• For Non US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental 
Organizations. While 2 CFR 200 does not directly apply to non-U.S. applicants, the 
Agreement Officer will use the standards of 2 CFR 200 in the administration of the 
award. 


 

See Annex 2 for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

(a) The Recipient shall comply with the Standard Provision set forth in Annex #2 of this 
Agreement entitled “Marking and Public Communications Under USAID-Funded Assistance 
(August 2013).” All reports shall be in English. 


 

(b) All written documentation (correspondence, reports, information sheets, etc.) for 
submission under this Cooperative Agreement must be in English. At a minimum, all 
documents must be provided in MS Word (or MS Excel or MS PowerPoint) and PDF 
(unlocked) formats. 


 

(c) All reporting and data must be synchronized with the United States Government (USG) 
fiscal year. FYI, quarterly periods are from October 1 – December 31; January 1 – March 31; 
April 1 – June 30; and, July 1 – September 30. Thus, quarterly reports are due on: January 31, 
April 30, July 31 and October 31, respectively. 


 

(d) In addition to discussing the achievements of the activity, challenges and potential 
solutions, the report will present semi-annual results (October – March) on the USAID 
indicators against the targets for that year. This should also include explanation for any 
indicator values falling above and below target. 


 

(e) The fourth quarter (July-September) report due on October 31 will be utilized by the 
USAID Mission as an annual report. The report should contain more information than the 
normal quarterly report, as USAID/Nigeria needs the information to fulfill its own annual 
reporting in November. In addition to the regular information (listed below), the fourth quarter 
report should discuss the achievements of the entire year and should contain a table displaying 
the indicators the partner is responsible for reporting on and the indicator values for the year, 
along with prior year values and future year targets. It should also include explanations for any 
indicator values falling above or below target. 


 

A. Financial Reporting: 


 

 Financial Reports will be submitted following relevant guidance contained in the award 
Standard Provisions. 

 


 Financial reporting will, at a minimum, require annual submission of the SF-425. 
Additional requirements, if any, will depend on the payment provisions of the award, 
which cannot be determined until after award. Financial reporting requirements and 
instructions will be specified in the award. 

 

(a) Reporting of Expenditures 

 

(i) Financial reporting requirements must be in accordance with 2 CFR 700.7 and 2 CFR 
200.327 regarding advance payments. Standard Form (SF) –270 or SF-1034 must be used to 
Request Advance payments. Either paper copies or electronic copies (scanned PDF document) 
may be submitted, but not both. 

 

(ii) SF-425 shall be used to report actual expenditures and shall be submitted within 30 
calendar days from the end of each quarter, except that the final report shall be submitted within 
90 calendar days from the estimated completion date of this Agreement. The Recipient shall 
submit the SF-425 form in the following manner: 

 

• An original copy to the Payment Office; 
• A copy to the AOR; 
• A copy to the Agreement Officer 


 

(iii) Electronic copies of the SF-425 can be found at: 

 

 https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/post-award-reporting-forms.html#sortby=1 

 

b) Reporting of Foreign Taxes 

 

The Recipient must comply with the Standard Provision set forth in the resulting Agreement 
entitled “Reporting of Host Government Taxes.” 

 

B. Performance Reporting 


 

(a) Performance Reports 


 

(i) The Recipient must submit a quarterly and annual program performance reports to the 
AOR, with a copy to the Agreement Officer, and USAID/Nigeria Monitoring and 
Evaluation Unit at e-mail: abujaprog-me@usaid.gov. Electronic submissions are 
preferred over hard copy. 


 

(ii) The due date for these program performance reports is not later than 30 days after the end 
of each reporting period. At a minimum, the report must include: 


 

● A comparison of actual accomplishments/results, both for the reporting period and 
cumulatively, with the established goals and objectives, and expected results; the 
findings of the investigator; or both. Data (both qualitative and quantitative) must be 
presented using established baseline data and indicators, and be supported by a brief 
narrative. This should include reporting on specific processes and activities that were 



planned for the period to support the relevant stakeholders. Whenever appropriate and 
the output of programs or activities can be readily quantified, such quantitative data 
should be related to cost data for computation of unit costs; 


 

● Reasons why established goals were not met (if applicable), the impact on the 
program objective(s), and how the impact has been/will be addressed; and 


 

● Other pertinent information including, when appropriate, success stories (if available) 
which illustrate the direct positive effects of the program; how unforeseen 
circumstances affected overall performance compared to original assumptions (if 
applicable), how activities were accordingly adjusted or re-targeted; and analysis and 
explanation of cost overruns or high unit costs. 


 

(iii) Additional guidance on the format and content of quarterly reports is contained in Annex 
#6 to this NOFO. 


 

(b) Notification 


 

The Recipient will submit to the AOR and AO the notification, as follows: (1) Developments 
which have a significant impact on the activities supported by this Award; and (2) Problems, 
delays, or adverse conditions which materially impair the ability to meet the objectives of this 
Cooperative Agreement. This notification will include a statement of the action taken or 
contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve the problem. 

 

(c) Final Report 


 

The Recipient must submit a final report to the AOR, with copies to the Agreement Officer, 
USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse at e-mail: DocSubmit@usaid.gov, and 
USAID/Nigeria Monitoring and Evaluation Unit at e-mail: abujaprog-me@usaid.gov. The final 
report must be submitted no later than 90 calendar days after the expiration or termination of the 
award. The final report shall also consolidate activities and analyses of all partners into one 
document and their activities and progress towards results. The final performance report must 
contain the following information: 

(i) A comparison of actual accomplishments with the goals and objectives established for the 
period, the findings of the investigator, or both. Whenever appropriate and the output of 
programs or activities can be readily quantified, such quantitative data should be related 
to cost data for computation of unit costs. 


 

(ii) Final data, compared to baseline data, for all indicators included in the monitoring and 
evaluation plan award activities. This section should include disaggregated data by 
gender, historically disenfranchised groups and other relevant groups identified. 


 

(iii) A summary of problems/obstacles encountered during the implementation, and how those 
obstacles were addressed and overcome if appropriate. 


 

(iv) Reasons why established goals were not met, if appropriate. 


 


(v) Other pertinent information including, when appropriate, analysis and explanation of cost 
overruns or high unit costs. 


 

(vi) Significance of these activities for overall elections and political processes development 
worldwide. 


 

(vii) Lessons learned best practices, and other findings along with recommendations for future 
programming under each of the program result. 


 

C. Annual Work Plan 


 

(a) Not later than 45 days after the effective date of this Cooperative Agreement, the 
Recipient must submit to the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR) an electronic 
copy of the annual work plan covering the first year of this Agreement, delineated by quarterly 
periods. The first annual work plan must include the first-year indicators and benchmarks which 
the Recipient proposes to utilize to measure and monitor progress toward achievement of results, 
as reflected in, and consistent with, the Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan, 
pending completion of the baseline survey. The work plan must include: the activities planned to 
be conducted, the site(s) where they will be conducted, benchmarks/milestones and annual 
performance targets, pending completion of the baseline survey; the outputs/outcomes which the 
Recipient expects to achieve; and the inputs planned to be provided by the Recipient, during the 
work plan period. Included shall be an explanation of how those inputs are expected to achieve 
the outputs/outcomes and benchmarks/milestones. 


 

The work plan will also consider whether boys and girls or women and men are involved or 
affected differently by the context or work to be undertaken, and if so, whether the difference is 
potentially significant for managing toward sustainable program impact. The Recipient will 
describe and use appropriate gender-sensitive methodologies and will maintain gender 
integration and balance in all activities, targeting women and girls when necessary to achieve 
that balance. 

 

The annual work plan will describe activities to be conducted at a greater level of detail than the 
activity description and application in response to the activity description, but must be clearly 
cross-referenced with the applicable sections in the activity description. Also included in the 
work plan will be an explanation of how those achievements are expected to contribute to the IR-
level results. An estimated budget and a pipeline analysis, identifying the anticipated inputs, 
must also be included. 

 

The Recipient will prepare the work plan in consultation with and with inputs from the advisory 
committee (if applicable), partners and beneficiaries of this activity, and also describe how the 
program plans to work with the Government of Nigeria, other USG-funded activities in-
country, as well as other donors and in-country partners. 

 

USAID will review the first-year work plan and provide comments/suggestions within 30 
calendar days of receipt. The Recipient must then submit the final work plan to the USAID 
AOR for approval not later than 15 calendar days from receipt of USAID's 


comments/suggestions. In the event that the Recipient receives no comments/suggestions from 
the AOR within 30 calendar days from the submission of the first-year work plan, the work 
plan will be considered approved. The Recipient must also submit a copy of the final first-year 
work plan to the Agreement Officer. 

 

(b) The Recipient must submit subsequent annual work plans to the USAID AOR not 
later than 30 calendar days prior to the start of the next Agreement year. These subsequent 
annual work plans will include updates of the performance indicators and benchmarks which the 
Recipient proposes to utilize in the coming year. The work plan must be delineated by quarterly 
periods. USAID will review the annual work plan and provide comments/suggestions within 30 
calendar days of receipt. The Recipient will then submit the final annual work plan to the USAID 
AOR for approval not later than 15 calendar days from receipt of USAID’s comments/ 
suggestions. In the event that the Recipient receives no comments/suggestions from the AOR 
within 30 calendar days from the submission of the annual work plan, the work plan will be 
considered approved. The Recipient must also submit a copy of the final annual work plan to the 
Agreement Officer. 


 

(c) The Recipient will submit any significant work plan changes or revisions to the 
USAID AOR with a copy to the Agreement Officer, and shall obtain the USAID AOR's approval 
prior to implementing or undertaking such changes or revisions. 


 

(d) Annual work plans and changes/revisions thereto must be within the scope of the 
Program Description of the award. The Program Description will take precedence over the work 
plans and any changes/revisions thereto, in the event of any conflicts or inconsistencies between 
the Program Description and the work plan and any changes/revisions thereto. Any changes to 
the Program Description must be approved by the Agreement Officer by means of a modification 
to the award. 


 

The work plan for year 1 will be for the period that extends from the activity start date through 
to September 30, 2019, so that afterward the work plan period will correspond with the same 
time period as the USG fiscal year, October 1 to September 30. In the final year, the work plan 
must be for a partial year that reflects the end date of the activity. 

 

4. Environmental Compliance 


 

The activity must adhere to the provisions in Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 
216 (22 CFR 216); applicable Nigeria environmental laws and procedures; and the approved 
USAID Initial Environmental Examination (IEE). Additionally, the activity must follow 
USAID’s procedures on climate risk management, which will also help to address long-term 
sustainability of this U.S. government investment. 

(a) The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the 
impact of USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID include 
environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in 
USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) Parts 201.5.10g and 204 
(http://www.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/), which, in part, require that the potential environmental 


impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and that 
appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. The Recipient’s 
environmental compliance obligations under these regulations and procedures are specified in 
the following paragraphs of this NOFO. 

 

(b) The Community Initiatives to Promote Peace (CIPP) activity may include “quick 
impact projects” that could have a significant impact on the environment or constitute major 
action requiring further environmental review. Pursuant to 22 CFR 216.2c USAID 
Environmental Procedures, a Negative Determination with Conditions applies, given that the 
proposed activity may have an effect on the natural or physical environment. If the Recipient 
chooses to issue sub-grants to host country organizations, it is anticipated that these interventions 
under such arrangement could have adverse environmental impacts, and so the Recipient must 
use an environmental review checklist in screening grant proposals to determine if this is the 
case. 

 

(c) In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental 
regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict between host 
country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 

 

(d) An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) has been approved for the FY2013-
FY2020 USAID/Nigeria Peace and Democratic Governance Program. The IEE covers activities 
expected to be implemented under this award. USAID has determined that a Negative 
Determination with Conditions applies to one or more of the proposed activities. This indicates 
that if these activities are implemented subject to the specified conditions, they are expected to 
have no significant adverse effect on the environment. The Recipient shall be responsible for 
implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to interventions to be funded under this award, 
including the development of an Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (EMMP). 

 

(e) As part of its initial work plan, and all annual work plans thereafter, the 
Recipient, in collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative and Mission 
Environmental Officer, shall review all ongoing and planned interventions under this award to 
determine if they are within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental 
documentation. 

 

(f) If the Recipient plans any new interventions outside the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation, it shall prepare an amendment to the 
documentation for USAID review and approval. No such new interventions shall be 
undertaken prior to receiving written USAID approval of environmental documentation 
amendments. 

 

(g) Any ongoing interventions found to be outside the scope of the approved 
Regulation 216 environmental documentation shall be halted until an amendment to the 
documentation is submitted and written approval is received from USAID. 

 

(h) Unless the approved Regulation 216 documentation contains a complete EMMP, 
the Recipient shall prepare an EMMP describing how the Recipient will, in specific terms, 
implement all IEE and/or Environmental Analysis (EA) conditions that apply to proposed 


Water ForAgricultureNoticeof Funding Opportunity (NOFO)
Solicitation # 72062019RFA00002

activities within the scope of theaward. The EMMP shall include monitoring the implementationof theconditions and their effectiveness. TheEMMP template can be found via this link:

http://usaidgems.org/compliance.htm

(i) The Recipient must integrate a completed EMMP intothe initial work plan andbudget. 
(j)The Recipient must integratean EMMP into subsequent Annual Work Plans,
making any necessary adjustments to activity implementation in order to minimize adverseimpacts to the environment. 
(k)USAID anticipates that environmental compliance and achievingoptimaldevelopment outcomesfor the proposed activities will require environmental managementexpertise. Applicants should therefore includeas part of their application theirapproach toachieving environmental compliance and management, to include:
●The Applicant’s approach to developing and implementingan environmentalreview process for a sub-grant fund and/oran EMMP. 
●The Applicant’sapproach to providing necessary environmental managementexpertise, including examples of past experience of environmentalmanagement of similar activities.
●The Applicant’s illustrative budget for implementing theenvironmental 
complianceactivities. For the purposes of this NOFO, Applicants should 
reflect illustrative costs for environmental compliance implementation andmonitoring in their cost application. 
5.Quarterly Environmental Mitigation & Monitoring Review Report
The Recipient must submit a quarterly Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring ReviewReport (EMMR) to the AOR, with a copy to the Agreement Officer. The EMMR template canbe found via this link:http://usaidgems.org/compliance.htm

6.Activity Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan
A comprehensive ActivityMonitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan must be submittedfor AOR approval for the complete award period within 45 calendar days of Agreementsignature. The MEL Plan will include an executive summary. AORapproval or requestformodifications will be within 15 calendar days, thereafter. The Recipient will then have 15calendar days to incorporate the modifications and resubmit the plan for AOR finalapproval.
AOR approval will be within 15 calendar days. 

The Recipient will identify indicators for each identified result. An indicator can be used to 
measure progress in more than one result. Targets foreach indicator shallalso be included in theMEL Plan for the life of the activity.

55


The MEL Plan must be consistent with USAID/Nigeria’s approved Mission Performance 
Management Plan. The implementing partner is expected, to the extent practicable, to include 
indicators which reflect the level of participation by typically disenfranchised groups, such as 
women, youth, persons with disabilities, and internally displaced persons. Results will be 
disaggregated by location, sex, ethnicity and age wherever possible and relevant. This will be the 
core information for all monitoring and evaluation exercises. To complement this information, 
additional data, assessments, relevant anecdotes and comments should contextualize the 
indicators when reported. 

 

The MEL Plan must clearly indicate the data gathering methodology, instruments, timeframe and 
other relevant elements of the evaluation system. 

 

The MEL Plan will take into consideration the following criteria, and in the case of at least one 
indicator per Lower Level Result, explain how these criteria are met: a) Integrity; b) Precision; c) 
Reliability; and d) Timeliness. 

 

The Recipient must include an Annual MEL Plan Report as part of its Fourth Quarterly Report, 
providing findings and results on indicators and the achievement of activity objectives by fiscal 
year. Additionally, the Recipient shall organize a presentation of the MEL Plan results for key 
partners, including USAID/Nigeria, which will take place as agreed upon with the 
USAID/Nigeria designated AOR. 

 

7. Other Requirements 


 

a. Climate Risk Management 




Recipient may be required to complete an initial climate risk management (CRM) screening in 
accordance with the Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 201: CRM for USAID Projects and 
Activities (ADS Guidance) consisting of a climate risk screening table and associated brief 
narrative. Only activities that receive a rating of “Moderate” or “High” will require completion 
of all columns in the CRM Table (as outlined in the ADS Guidance). USAID will provide 
Climate Risk Screening and Management Tools to support this process. 

 

More information is available at: https://www.climatelinks.org/integration/climate-risk-
management/resources and the World Bank Climate Knowledge Portal 
http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/. 

 

b. Development Experience Clearinghouse Requirements 




 

For information concerning submission requirements of copies of reports and other information 
to USAID’s Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC), refer to the Standard Provisions 
entitled “Submissions to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and Publications (June 
2012)” for U.S. NGOs and “Submission to the Development Experience Clearinghouse and 
Data Rights (June 2012)” for Non-U.S. NGOs. 

 

c. Final Property Inventory Report 




 


The Mission Agreement Officer will determine how program income, if anticipated to be 
generated under the award(s), will be treated (see 2 CFR 200.307 or, for non-U.S. organizations, 
see the Standard Provision “Program Income”). 

 

d. Security Reporting 




 

As part of the overall security requirements, the Recipient must report any security threats and/or 
incidents verbally / by telephone, immediately to the following USAID/Nigeria representatives: 

 

● Security & Safety Specialist and any other USAID/Nigeria EXO designated official(s); 


 

● Executive Officer (EXO); and 


 

● Agreement Officer Representative (AOR) or Alternate AOR in the AOR’s absence. 


 

Subsequently, a written report shall be submitted in accordance with approved procedures 
delineated below. The Recipient shall develop a list of specific steps to track any 
potential/identified threats, which will be part of its overall security system. All sub-awardees 
will be required by the Recipient to report any threats/incidents to the Recipient, who will 
immediately after, notify the above listed USAID/Nigeria representatives. 

 

(a) Security Reporting Responsibilities 


 

USAID requires appropriate security reports be submitted to the Nigeria Safety & Security 
Specialist, Executive Office; AOR and other USAID/Nigeria officials as directed by USAID 
Executive Office. The type and frequency of these reports may vary with the activity scope, 
location, and criticality. The Recipient shall report an Initial Threat Assessment and subsequent 
changes as often as the situation requires (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly etc.). The Recipient is 
also required to notify USAID of any security-related incident in a timely manner according to 
the following guidelines: 

 

(b) Incident Reporting 


 

There are various types of Incident Reporting: Serious Incident Report (SIR); Incident Report 
(IR); Situation Report (SITREP); and any other security-related report that may be required by 
USAID. 

 

(i) Serious Incident Report (SIR) 

 

● An incident that involves the death, injury, kidnapping of implementing partner 
(IP) personnel and/or damage to IP property; 
● An incident that has critically damaged the funded program, such as fire, 
catastrophic flood, etc.; 
● Initial SIR must be reported orally immediately, and within four (4) hours of the 
incident occurrence/discovery; 
● A complete SIR must be filed in writing/e-mail within 24 hours of the incident; 



● Updated written SIR will continue to be filed in a timely basis (daily, weekly) as 
long as the situation exists. The timeline will be adjusted as required by USAID-
Nigeria Safety & Security Office; and 
● Final Report SIR will summarize the incident, the subsequent happenings and the 
final resolution. 


 

(ii) Incident Report (IR) 

 

● An incident involving accidents, potential harm, suspicious persons or acts, 
threats or harassing actions against personnel or the program. 


 

● IR should be initially reported orally immediately, followed up with a written 
report filed as soon as possible (within 24 hours). After the incident is evaluated, a 
complete detailed written report must be submitted to USAID- Nigeria, not later 
than 72 hours after the incident. 


 

(iii) Situation Report (SITREP) 

 

● A report that a significant, but not critical action or activity, has taken place 
that has impacted, or may impact, on the well-being of the personnel or the 
success of the program. 


 

● This report may describe trends, second-hand information that may have 
bearing on the activity, or impact on future operations. 


 

● There is no pre-determined reporting timeline. The report will be issued as 
needed and required by USAID Nigeria Safety & Security Office. 


 

Telephonic communication is the preferred method to provide the initial information of an 
incident. A written report by e-mail must follow as soon as possible within above described 
guidelines and it shall be as detailed as possible. The report shall follow the format 
approved in the original Security Plan but at a minimum it shall contain the name of the IP 
or sub-awardee, name of the victim(s), date, time, a description of what happened, where 
the incident occurred, and any other relevant details surrounding the incident. If this is an 
ongoing incident, progress reports should be submitted in accordance with the guidelines 
provided in order to keep USAID/Nigeria security personnel apprised of the situation. 

 

e. Special Agreement Requirements 




 

Applicants must carefully consider the following special provisions to be incorporated in the 
resulting agreement: 

 

(1) Security Conditions: The Recipient must be aware of security conditions in Nigeria, 
and by entering into an agreement, assumes full responsibility for the safety of its employees. 
Prior to commencing work, the Recipient shall ensure that it has adequate procedures in place 
to advise its employees of situations or changed conditions that could adversely affect their 
security. In order to keep abreast of security conditions in Nigeria, the Recipient shall seek 


information from all available sources, including the USAID Nigeria EXO/Safety & Security 
Office (SSO), for all areas in which its employees work or travel. The Recipient acknowledges 
that security conditions are subject to change at any moment, that USAID cannot guarantee the 
accuracy of any information that it may provide to the Recipient and that USAID assumes no 
responsibility for the reliability of such information. The Recipient has sole responsibility for 
approving all travel plans for its employees and/or their dependents traveling to post if allowed 
by the Recipient’s personnel internal policies. The Recipient will also be responsible for 
immediately notifying USAID Nigeria and the U.S. Embassy American Citizen Services 
section in the event a U.S. citizen employee does not return from travel as expected or does not 
report to work. In the event that USAID requests the Recipient to do so, the Recipient's Chief of 
Party (COP) shall assume responsibility for contacting all of its employees. The Recipient shall 
provide to the USAID Nigeria EXO/SSO the name, current address, and current home and/or 
cellular telephone number of the COP and of an alternate designated employee. The Recipient 
will be responsible for ensuring that the information on file in the USAID Nigeria EXO/SSO is 
up-to-date so that in an emergency, the COP or alternate representative can be reached 
immediately and he/she can rapidly contact all other affected employees. 

 

The Recipient will be requested to notify the USAID/Nigeria Agreement Officer’s 
Representative (AOR) and EXO/SSO about any changes of the individual listed in the security 
plan as in charge of security. 

 

Once the agreement is awarded, the Recipient shall be required to submit a list of all personnel 
involved in the implementation of the activity, including subawardees’ personnel. This is defined 
as all personnel of the Recipient and subawardees for whom at least a portion of their 
compensation is paid out of the activity budget. The required list shall be submitted to the AOR 
and EXO/SSO no later than 30 days after the start date of the agreement and must be updated 
every quarter after the start date of the agreement and/or if a change of personnel happens. 

 

(2) Security Protocol: The Recipient shall develop a security plan to safeguard all activity 
operations and to comply with all United States Government regulations and Nigerian law. The 
plan is to be implemented and maintained also by all subcontractors (and/or sub-grantees). The 
security plan will be reviewed by the Agreement Officer in consultation with USAID/Nigeria’s 
EXO/SSO. 

 

The plan shall include: 

 

● Procedures for reporting and addressing security threats; 
● Procedures for reporting any deaths related to the activity; 
● Procedures for reporting and addressing any persons missing or kidnapping incidents; 
● Name and contact information of security contact person for the head office and regional 
office(s); and 
● An internal “cascade” list for communicating with staff, which should be updated/ 
maintained by the Recipient. The Recipient shall provide the name, address and 
telephone numbers of the COP and their designee to USAID as principal contacts in case 
of security situations/emergencies. The Recipient will be responsible for passing 
information to their staff. 


 


(3) Life Support and Security Services: The Recipient will be responsible for maintaining 
the security of its personnel, materials and equipment. All employees of the Recipient must 
meet the requirements of their work-site, which may include, but not limited to background 
checks, security/restricted area clearances, drug-free workplace, safety training and/or any other 
IP safety and security requirements. 

 

The Applicant will provide USAID/Nigeria a Security Plan and budget for security costs as part 
of its application as further detailed in Section IV of this NOFO. The Security Plan and budget 
shall delineate and justify for reasonableness all costs and provide a coherent, overall integrated 
security plan that demonstrates that the Applicant has undertaken a thoughtful review of their 
security needs and includes analysis of the various elements of a security system. 

 

(4) Allowable Reimbursement for Security Training: USAID award recipients that would 
like to seek reimbursement for sending employees to security-related training will need to first 
seek approval from their AOR. Provided the cost associated with attending the identified 
training does not exceed the small purchase threshold outlined in their award, they will not need 
to notify their AO, although copying them on the correspondence seeking approval for 
attendance and reimbursement is recommended. 

 

The request to attend and be reimbursed for the training will need to follow the usual 
Procurement Justification process. The request should identify who would be attending, the 
associated cost, and a justification. A justification with language similar to the following should 
suffice: 

 

In Nigeria the ability to provide aid is being hampered by the rising security threats 
faced by humanitarian and development workers and the increasing difficulties they face 
in accessing affected populations. Security training is needed to train aid workers on how 
to help prevent incidents from happening and learning strategies to stay safe so services 
can be delivered. A good training program covering such topics as situational 
awareness, personal security, crisis and hostage management, defensive driving, first 
aid, and carjacking will provide Implementing Partners with the skills they need to work 
in potentially adverse areas of the country. 

 

The AOR will respond to requests for training within two (2) business days of receiving the 
request. Once the approval is received from the AOR, the requestor may proceed with taking the 
training. 

 

Once the training has been completed, reimbursement is requested in the manner outlined in the 
organization’s normal reimbursement process. If an awardee has a training line item in their 
approved budget, they are free to proceed without seeking approval from their AOR. If an award 
recipient is willing to absorb the cost of the training and does not intend to seek reimbursement, 
there is no need for them to notify their AOR. 

 

f. Conflict Mitigation Measures 




 

This Activity will assess risks resulting from bringing resources into communities that may have 
ongoing conflict dynamics, related to the activities in the scope of this activity, or may develop 


due to the activity. The Activity will use a conflict lens in the design of interventions, first, to 
“do no harm” second, to mitigate rather than fuel conflict; and third, to create a positive peace-
building environment. 

 

Rural conflicts are prevalent in Nigeria and are often linked to competition over natural 
resources, like pasture and water. A conflict assessment will be conducted at the start of the 
activity to understand local conflict dynamics related to the scope of the activity and flexibility in 
incorporating recommendations that will mitigate violent conflict into the activity. This 
assessment will enable the implementation team to understand and address the underlying causes 
of conflict-related violence, and identify and support opportunities for peace building. The 
implementer will conduct an overarching conflict assessment in collaboration with the FMARD, 
at the start of the Activity to understand local conflict dynamics. The Office of Economic 
Growth and Environment will work with the Office of Peace and Democratic Governance to 
ensure that work plans respond to conflict dynamics as interventions are deployed. 

 

Care will be taken in supporting the spread of agriculture, particularly irrigated crop production, 
as most suitable land is often riparian and wetland adjacent areas that are crucial grazing at 
certain times in migrations. The conversion of these lands into farming areas is an historic agro-
pastoral point of tension in the region. The local, state, federal and regional local pastoral 
corridors and grazing allowances should be observed and negotiated, if needed, at the 
community level to not exacerbate matters. 

 

Greater emphasis will be placed on the changing dynamics of livestock keeping in the target 
areas, including: (i) most households, even those that practice crop agriculture, are dependent on 
livestock, (ii) livestock losses were suffered by both farmers and pastoralists, (iii) significant 
losses and insecurity have changed the nature of herding, with farmers and smaller pastoralists 
contracting hired herders to keep and move with livestock, (iv) herders tend to gather together in 
large herds when the security situation is unstable, (v) there is a relationship between criminal 
and insurgent groups and large herds related to levying taxes, livestock thefts, and ancillary 
businesses associated with various actors integrated into or following herds. 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

The under listed are the agency contacts for this NOFO: 

 

Mrs. Cheryl Hodge-Snead 

Agreement Officer 

Office of Acquisition &Assistance (OAA) 

USAID/Nigeria 

 Email: chodge-snead@usaid.gov 

 

 And 

 

 Mr. Usen Akpan 

 Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

 Office of Acquisition & Assistance (OAA) 

 USAID/Nigeria 

 Email: uakpan@usaid.gov 

 

 

[END SECTION G] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability 
of funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or 
used by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an 
award is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

[END SECTION H] 

 

 


ANNEX 1 – ILLUSTRATIVE SUMMARY BUDGET FORMAT 

 

 

 

Catergory 

Year 1 

Example for Year 1 through 
Year 3 

Grand Total 

Base/ 
Units 

Rate/ 
Unit Cost 

Total 

3-Year 
Total 
Base/Units 

3-Year 
Total 
Amount 

Personnel 

a) Long Term Expatriate Staff 

b) Local Professionals 

b) Local Support Staff 

c) Home Office 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Personnel Total 

 

 

 

 

 

Fringe Benefits 

a) Long Term Expatriate Staff 

b) Local Professionals 

b) Local Support Staff 

c) Home Office 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Travel 

a) Entitlement Travel 

b) Programmatic Travel 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Equipment 

a) Above $5,000 

b) Below $5,000 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Supplies 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Contractual 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Construction 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Other Direct Costs (as 
applicable) Examples - 

a) Security Costs 
b) Consultants 


i) International/Regional 

ii) Local 

c) Allowances 


i) Long Term Expat 

ii)Short Term Expat 

d) Participant Training 
(including Tuition and 
Travel costs if any) 


 

 

 

 

$ 

Total Direct Charges 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Indirect Charges 

 

 

 

 

$ 

a) Overhead 

b) G&A 

 

 

 

 

$ 

Total Estimated Amount 

 

 

 

 

$ 




 

 

ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

 (Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain the following “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

Required 

 

Standard Provision 

Yes 

RAA1. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PREDETERMINED (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA2. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATES - 
PROVISIONAL (Nonprofit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA3. NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST RATE - 
PROVISIONAL (Profit) (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA4. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

Not 
Required 

RAA5. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING ACTIVITIES 
– SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS (JANUARY 2009) 

Not 
Required 

RAA6. PROTECTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS A RESEARCH 
SUBJECT (APRIL 1998) 

Not 
Required 

RAA7. CARE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS (MARCH 2004) 

Yes 

RAA8. TITLE TO AND CARE OF PROPERTY 
(COOPERATING COUNTRY TITLE) (NOVEMBER 1985) 

Yes 

RAA9. COST SHARING (MATCHING) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

Yes 

RAA10. PROHIBITION OF ASSISTANCE TO DRUG 
TRAFFICKERS (JUNE 1999) 

Not 
Required 

RAA11. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

Yes 

RAA12. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA13. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

Not 
Required 

RAA14. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

Not 

RAA15. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 




Required 

Yes 

RAA16. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING (ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA17. USAID DISABILITY POLICY - ASSISTANCE 
(DECEMBER 2004) 

Yes 

RAA18. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

Yes 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

Not 
Required 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

Not 
Required 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 

Yes 

RAA22. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

Yes 

RAA23. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

Not 
Required 

RAA24. PATENT REPORTING PROCEDURES (DECEMBER 
2014) 

Yes 

RAA25. ACCESS TO USAID FACILITIES AND USAID’S 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS (AUGUST 2013) 

Yes 

RAA26. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA27. AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR RECIPIENT 
INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS (April 2016) 

Not 
Required 

RAA28. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH 
ASSISTANCE (MAY 2017) 



 

 

REQUIRED AS APPLICABLE STANDARD PROVISIONS FOR NON-U.S. 
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

 

 

Required 

 

Standard Provision 

Yes 

RAA1. ADVANCE PAYMENT AND REFUNDS (DECEMBER 
2014) 

Yes 

RAA2. REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENT AND REFUNDS 
(DECEMBER 2014) 

Not 
Required 

RAA3. INDIRECT COSTS – NEGOTIATED INDIRECT COST 
RATE AGREEMENT (NICRA) (DECEMBER 2014) 




Yes 

RAA4. INDIRECT COSTS – CHARGED AS A FIXED 
AMOUNT (NONPROFIT) (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA5. UNIVERSAL IDENTIFIER AND SYSTEM OF AWARD 
MANAGEMENT (July 2015) 

Yes 

RAA6. REPORTING SUBAWARDS AND EXECUTIVE 
COMPENSATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA7. SUBAWARDS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA8. TRAVEL AND INTERNATIONAL AIR 
TRANSPORTATION (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA9. OCEAN SHIPMENT OF GOODS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA10. REPORTING HOST GOVERNMENT TAXES (JUNE 
2012) 

Yes 

RAA11. PATENT RIGHTS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA12. EXCHANGE VISITORS AND PARTICIPANT 
TRAINING (JUNE 2012) 

Not 
Required 

RAA13. INVESTMENT PROMOTION (NOVEMBER 2003) 

Yes 

RAA 14. COST SHARE (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA15. PROGRAM INCOME (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA16. FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DELEGATIONS TO 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA17. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE 
DISABLED IN USAID ASSISTANCE AWARDS INVOLVING 
CONSTRUCTION (SEPTEMBER 2004) 

Not 
Required 

RAA18. PROTECTION OF HUMAN RESEARCH SUBJECTS 
(JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA19. STATEMENT FOR IMPLEMENTERS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES ON LACK OF SUPPORT FOR 
PROSTITUTION (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA20. ELIGIBILITY OF SUBRECIPIENTS OF ANTI-
TRAFFICKING FUNDS (JUNE 2012) 

Yes 

RAA21. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
FUNDS TO PROMOTE, SUPPORT, OR ADVOCATE FOR THE 
LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF PROSTITUTION (JUNE 
2012) 

Not 
Required 

RAA22. VOLUNTARY POPULATION PLANNING 
ACTIVITIES – SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
(JANUARY 2009) 

Not 
Required 

RAA23. CONSCIENCE CLAUSE IMPLEMENTATION 
(ASSISTANCE) (FEBRUARY 2012) 

Not 

RAA24. CONDOMS (ASSISTANCE) (SEPTEMBER 2014) 




Required 

Not 
Required 

RAA25. PROHIBITION ON THE PROMOTION OR 
ADVOCACY OF THE LEGALIZATION OR PRACTICE OF 
PROSTITUTION OR SEX TRAFFICKING(ASSISTANCE) 
(SEPTEMBER 2014) 

Not 
Required 

RAA26. LIMITATION ON SUBAWARDS TO NON-LOCAL 
ENTITIES (JULY 2014) 

Yes 

RAA27. CONTRACT PROVISION FOR DBA INSURANCE 
UNDER RECIPIENT PROCUREMENTS (DECEMBER 2014) 

Yes 

RAA28. CONTRACT AWARD TERM AND CONDITION FOR 
RECIPIENT INTEGRITY AND PERFORMANCE MATTERS 
(April 2016) 

Not 
Required 

RAA29. PROTECTING LIFE IN GLOBAL HEALTH 
ASSISTANCE (MAY 2017). 



 

 

 


ANNEX 3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

ABE: Activity Budget Estimate 

ADP: Agricultural Development Program 

ADS: Automated Directive System 

AO: Agreement Officer 

AO: Assistance Objectives 

AOR: Agreement Officer’s Representative 

APP: Agricultural Promotion Policy 

ASP: Assistance Selection Plan 

CA: Cooperative Agreement 

CDCS: Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

CFR: Code of Federal Regulations 

CLA: Collaborating, Learning and Adapting 

COP: Chief of Party 

CPA: Certified Public Account 

CRS/M: Climate Risk Screening/Management 

DCOP: Deputy Chief of Party 

DFID: Department for International Development 

DO: Development Objectives 

EG: Economic Growth 

EGE Office: Economic Growth & Environment Office 

EMMP: Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan 

EU: European Union 

FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization 

FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization’s 


FSN: Foreign Service National 

FTF: Feed the Future 

FY 2018: Fiscal Year 2018 

GAAS: Generally Accepted Auditing Standards 

GC: General Counsel 

GIS: Geographic information systems 

GIZ: German Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 

GON: Government of Nigeria 

HL: Health 

IDPs: Internally Displaced Persons 

IEE: Initial Environmental Examination 

IM-level: Implementing Mechanism Level 

IP: Implementing Partner 

ISIS-WA: Islamic State of Iraq and Syria in West Africa 

LEGS: Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standard 

LGAs: Local Government Areas 

LMR: Livelihoods market recovery 

M&E System: Monitoring & Evaluation System 

MARD: Ministry of Water Resources, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

MEL Plan: Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 

MLP: Ministry Livestock Production 

NOFO: Notice of Funding Opportunity 

NICRA: Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement 

OCHA: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 

OFDA: Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance 


OTI: Office of Transition Initiatives 

PAD: Project Appraisal Document 

PALT: Procurement Action Lead Times 

PD: Program Description 

PPI: Past Performance Information 

RLO: Resident Legal Officer 

SAM: System for Award Management 

SC: Selection Committee 

SO2: Strategic Objective 2 

SPS: Sanitary and phytosanitary 

TEC: Technical Evaluation Committee 

UN: United Nations 

UNDP: United Nations Development Program 

UNICEF: United Nations Children’s Fund 

USAID/Nigeria: United States Agency for International Development, Nigeria 

USG: United States Government 

WASH: Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 

WB: World Bank 

WRSA: Water resources sustainability assessments 

WUA: Water User Associations 

WUAs: Water User Associations 

 

 

 

 


ANNEX #4: Past Performance Information 

 

Name of Applicant: __________________________ 

 

Name of Evaluator: __________________________ 

 

 

 

 

1. Award Number: 

 

2. Contractor/Recipient (Name and Address): 

 

3. Type of Award: 

 

4. Complexity of Work: Difficult Routine 

 

5. Description of the work performed, location, and relevancy of work: 

 

6. Dollar Value of Work : Status: Active Completed 

 

7. Date of Award: 

Award Completion Date (including extensions): _____ 

 

8. Type and Extent of Subawards: 

 

9. Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address of the Awarding 
Contracting/Agreement Officer and/or the Contracting/Agreement Officer ’s 
Representative (and other references as applicable): 



 

 


Based on your knowledge of the proposed applicant, please rate the applicant performance in the 
following areas: 

 

1. How well applicant performed. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

2. The relevancy of the work performed under the program. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

3. Instances of good performance. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

4. Instances of poor performance. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

5. Significant achievement. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

6. Significant problems. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 


 

 

 

7. Any indications of excellent or exceptional performance in the most critical areas. 


 

Comments: 
________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

8. Overall Rating: Overall, how would you rate the applicant’s performance? 


 

 Exceptional 
 Very good 
 Satisfactory 
 Marginal 
 Unsatisfactory 


 

Additional comments: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

ANNEX #5: Sample Format for Initial Security Plan 

 

INTRODUCTION 

 

The items contained herein are to be considered a baseline in the development of a Security Plan. 
As this guidance was developed for use across the Agency, it cannot take into account all “on-
the-ground” situations. Thus, developers should consider the augmentation of their security plans 
to meet specific threats and possible emergencies posed by the environment. 

 

Each USAID partner will look at its security posture differently. The plan must include: 

 

1) An opening statement of management responsibilities with a brief description that 
summarizes the corporate, company, and or organizational philosophy regarding security 
in general (high profile, low profile etc.) and specifically towards this program/project. 




 

2) A description/summary with an overview of the particular program/project. The plan 
must also indicate the intended method of managing the “safety and security program” 
i.e. in house by a security manager or contracted to a third party. 




 

3) A Threat Analysis and a Risk Assessment conducted by a competent authority, preferably 
a professional Security Expert. This product must cover all facets of the Applicant's 
operations (i.e. lodging, office, transportation, operational area, etc.) 




 

● Current and previous security situation (to include crime, insurgent activity, 
kidnappings, police and military operations, etc.) in the area(s) of proposed 
program/project activities, the company's offices, and employee living areas. 
● Previous security incidents that involved the company and/or its personnel or 
other organizations in the vicinity previous and current threats against the 
company and/or its personnel. 


 

4) Location(s) of proposed program/project offices and activities. 




 

5) Period of Performance of the award. 




 

6) The company's current security plan (if applicable) including perimeter security (i .e. "11' 
high, l' foot thick, concrete and brick wall, with razor wire on top totaling approx. 13' 
that surrounds the facility/ies, CCTV system, 10' high metal entry/exit door manned by a 
24/7 armed guard, with cabin, etc). 




 

7) For requests of vehicles: 
• Number of vehicles requested 
• Vendor that will be utilized 
• Frequency of travel utilizing vehicles 
• Terrain 
• Driver Training Plan 





• Passenger orientation and driver training plan. 




 

Note: Armored vehicles have different handling characteristics and drivers and perspective 
passengers should be trained in evasive driving techniques as well as handling the particular type 
of vehicle in emergency situations. 

 

8) A security point of contact in case for questions or clarifications. 




 

9) Planned methods to mitigate the threats, including evidence of an assessment or 
evaluation of alternative security precautions. These may include but not be limited to: 
Issuance and use of two-way radios and/or other communication networks, upgrading 
buildings, deploying guards and/or guard force, CCTV system, or purchasing additional 
vehicles as recommended by security experts, assessing the manner in which the FAV is 
envisaged to be used in terms of safety etc. 




 

10) A cost breakdown along with comprehensive budget narrative. Initial funding request 
should be identified broken out by line item and incremental funding identified capturing 
annual cost and overall funding limit for the life of the award. 




 

Please note that the above items are not an all-inclusive list; there may be additional relevant 
information or items to be considered. Therefore, when submitting a Security Plan, all relevant 
and necessary information must be addressed/explained. 

 

SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES 

 

The following topics are not part of an all-inclusive list, but represent a guidance of the elements 
the developer should consider to protect life and property from attack, theft, or environmental 
loss. If any of the topics is not considered relevant for the specific program/project, a short 
statement outlining why the topic is not relevant to the plan should be included. 

 

Physical Security for the Program/Project Office(s) and/or personnel residences 

 

- Facility Location(s) – provide pertinent security information for each facility and/or 
residences 
- Site Plan(s) / photographs 
- Perimeter 
o Barriers (bollards/vehicle control/personnel access control/ditch) 
o Perimeter wall (anti-climb/construction) 
o Visitor and package/mail screening 
o CCTV coverage and data storage – method to monitor and security of the storage 
medium. 
o Lighting 
o Setback 



- ‘Hardline’ protection 
o Wall construction 
o Man-passable openings 
o Doors and Locks 






o Windows and Shatter Resistant Window Film (SRWF) 
o Access control procedures 
o Eliminating climbable platforms if applicable 



- Interior 
o SRWF 
o CCTV ( archiving) 
o Imminent Danger Notification System type alarm 
o Safe room - procedures 
o Room locks 
o Emergency procedures posted, drilled, and documented 





 

Guard Force Considerations for the Program/Project Office(s) and/or personnel residences 

 

- Guard Force 
o Guard force duties 
o Staffing per shift 
o Equipment that will be issued (armed/unarmed etc.) 
o Shift hours (avoid 12 hour shifts) 
o Pre-hire screening 
o Documented training (rules of engagement, firearms, first aid etc.) 





 

Infrastructure 

 

- Power 
o Generator (back-up power) size 
o Fuel delivery and storage 





 

- Other Considerations 
o Potable water source and emergency supply 
o Environmental factors (flood/seismic) 
o Proximity to emergency response 
o Fire safety, smoke and carbon-monoxide alarms 
o Emergency food stores 





 

SAFETY & SECURITY POLICIES AND PLANS 

 

Corporate, company, and or organizational policies and plans that are specific to the 
program/project should be addressed. 

 

Policies 

- Incident reporting (SIR, IR, SR, etc.) 
- Weapons on the premises/ 
- Premises access 
- Pre-hire staff vetting 
- Branding (USAID and other) 
- ID issuance and display 
- Medical treatment 



- Movement on foot and vehicular 
- Vehicle accident 
- Night letters and other threats to staff 
- Visitors access procedures 
- Safeguarding sensitive information 
- Travel policies including local, field and international. 
- Compliance with licenses under Nigeria laws. 


 Plans 

- Communications plan (including emergency cascade phone list) 
- Fire in/on the premises 
- Bomb threat 
- Emergency Evacuation from premises 
- Emergency Evacuation area/country 
- Personal Recovery/Kidnapping release plan 
- Emergency Action Plan 


 

STAFF TRAINING 

 

Training should be addressed at the outset of the program/project with scheduled refresher 
training included. Additionally, all training should be documented and recorded. Drills to 
establish the level of comprehension should also be considered. 

 

Operational Security 

o Cell phone 
o Travel 
o Handling of sensitive information 
o Public 


- Environmental Awareness/Cultural Sensitivity 
- First Aid – what supplies and capabilities will be on premises 
- Driving/Passenger 
- Counterintelligence 


 



ANNEX #6: USAID/Nigeria Quarterly Reporting Standard Format for all IPs 

 


ANNEX #7: Branding and Marking Requirement Waiver 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[END OF ANNEXES] 

 

 

[END OF NOFO] 

 

 

 

 

 


