 

Horizontal_RGB_600 


Issue Date: July 14, 2022 

Deadline for Questions: July 28, 2022 at 07:30 AM Harare Time 

Closing Date: August 18, 2022 at 07:30 AM Harare Time 

 

Subject: Notice of Funding Opportunity Number: 72061322RFA00004 

 

Program Title: Young People for Integrity and Accountability (YPIA) Activity 

 

Federal Assistance Listing Number: 98.001 

 

Ladies/Gentlemen: 

 

The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is seeking applications for a 
cooperative agreement from qualified entities to implement the Partnership for Justice Young 
People for Integrity and Accountability (YPIA) program. Eligibility for this award is not 
restricted. 

 

USAID intends to make an award to the applicant who best meets the objectives of this funding 
opportunity based on the merit review criteria described in this NOFO subject to a risk 
assessment. Eligible parties interested in applying are encouraged to read this NOFO thoroughly 
to understand the type of program sought, application submission requirements and selection 
process. 

 

To be eligible for award, the applicant must provide all information as required in this NOFO and 
meet eligibility standards in Section C of this NOFO. This funding opportunity is posted on 
www.grants.gov, and may be amended. It is the responsibility of the applicant to regularly check 
the website to ensure they have the latest information pertaining to this notice of funding 
opportunity and to ensure that the NOFO has been received from the internet in its entirety. 
USAID bears no responsibility for data errors resulting from transmission or conversion process. 
If you have difficulty registering on www.grants.gov or accessing the NOFO, please contact the 
Grants.gov Helpdesk at 1-800-518-4726 or via email at support@grants.gov for technical 
assistance. 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all applicable 
unique entity identifier and System for Award Management (SAM) requirements detailed in 
Section D.6.f. The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants 
are encouraged to begin registration early in the process. 

 


Please send any questions to the point(s) of contact identified in Section D. The deadline for 
questions is shown above. Responses to questions received prior to the deadline will be furnished 
to all potential applicants through an amendment to this notice posted to www.grants.gov. 

 

Issuance of this notice of funding opportunity does not constitute an award commitment on the 
part of the Government nor does it commit the Government to pay for any costs incurred in 
preparation or submission of comments/suggestions or an application. Applications are submitted 
at the risk of the applicant. All preparation and submission costs are at the applicant’s expense. 

 

Thank you for your interest in USAID programs. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

 

 

 

J. Zeb Simpson 

Agreement Officer 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

Section A – Program Description 

 

4 

Section B – Federal Award Information 

 

13 

Section C – Eligibility Information 

 

15 

Section D – Application and Submission Information 

 

16 

Section E – Application Review Information 

 

27 

Section F – Federal Award Administration Information 

 

29 

Section G – Federal Awarding Agency Contacts 

 

33 

Section H – Other Information 

 

34 

Annex 1 

 

35 

Annex 2 

 

36 

Annex 3 

 

37 



 

 

 

 


SECTION A: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

 

This funding opportunity is authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA) of 1961, as 
amended. The resulting award will be subject to 2 CFR 200 – Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, and USAID’s 
supplement, 2 CFR 700, as well as the additional requirements found in Section F. 

Introduction 

The United States Agency for International Development in Zimbabwe (USAID/Zimbabwe) 
anticipates awarding a five-year, $12 million activity called Young People for Integrity and 
Accountability (YPIA). The cooperative agreement to be awarded under this Notice of Funding 
Opportunity (NOFO) will contribute to results under Development Objective (DO3) of 
USAID/Zimbabwe’s five-year Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) 2016-20220F1 
and the three DOs of the 2022-2027 CDCS. U.S. and non-U.S. organizations may participate 
under this Notice of Funding Opportunity. 

1 For access to USAID/Zimbabwe’s CDCS, please visit: https://www.usaid.gov/zimbabwe/cdcs 

2 Institutions are drawn from private and public spheres at the sub-national level. 

3 See https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/200mbo.pdf 

 

Overall Purpose 

The purpose of this activity is to strengthen the ability of young people and key institutions at the 
sub-national level to improve good governance and public integrity. The objectives of this activity 
are to: 

1. Build knowledge, attitudes, and capacities of young people to shun corruption. 
2. Build and strengthen the capacity of sub-national institutions1F2 as champions for anti-
corruption reform and policy implementation. 
3. Increase the efficacy of anti-corruption actors in public and private spheres at sub-national 
levels to identify, monitor, report, and address corrupt practices. 


USAID/Zimbabwe is committed to encouraging a culture of rule of law and constitutionalism in 
Zimbabwe by supporting interventions that strengthen institutional independence, transparency, 
and accountability. The activity seeks to find innovative ways to engage the full spectrum of state 
and non-state justice sector actors and institutions at the national and subnational levels. 
USAID/Zimbabwe is committed to fighting corruption and promoting good governance in 
Zimbabwe. For USAID, corruption means the abuse of entrusted authority for private gain2F3 and 
the Agency further recognizes that all forms of corruption undermine development and 


democracy. Our support seeks to strengthen both private (e.g. business sector) and public 
institutions (e.g. health, education and other social services) working to promote good 
governance. The activity seeks innovative ways to empower citizens in general and young people 
in particular, to fight corruption; facilitate access to information; strengthen sub-national 
institutions and promote rule of law with the ultimate aim of reducing both grand and petty 
corruption in Zimbabwe. 

II. BACKGROUND AND PROBLEM ANALYSIS 

Corruption in Zimbabwe is endemic; it is the enemy of development, progress, and democracy. 
The impacts of corruption in Zimbabwe manifest in poor public service delivery (such as health 
care, agriculture, infrastructure, and other services), minimal public trust in government 
institutions, and low citizen participation in local or national governance and democratic 
processes. Zimbabwe consistently ranks as one of the most corrupt countries in the world; the 
2021 Transparency International Corruption Perception Index shows the country ranks 157th out 
of 180 countries. These high levels of corruption weaken systems and structures which in turn 
make citizens poorer as they lack access to fair opportunities and they then default to participating 
in corrupt activities, making corruption the norm and not the exception. 

Recent findings on corruption in Zimbabwe show that illicit cross-border financial transactions 
cost Zimbabwe up to a staggering $3 billion a year, and intra-country fraud associated with cartels 
could cost up to $1 billion every year. According to a 2020 report by the International Crisis 
Group, up to $1.5 billion worth of gold per year is illegally smuggled out of the country; billions 
of dollars in diamonds go unaccounted for; and in 2018 Zimbabwe’s auditor-general noted that 
82% of government expenditure had financial irregularity in one form or another. In a report 
released by the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC), Harare metropolitan province 
accounted for 93% of all corruption cases received in 20203F4. These findings provide a glimpse 
into the country’s potential for revenue generation, absent corruption. They also show how 
corruption deprives the country and its people of economic prosperity. 

4 https://www.afrobarometer.org/publication/ad477-zimbabweans-fear-retaliation-reporting-corruption-compounds-pandemic-within/ 

For any efforts to fight corruption to succeed, more Zimbabweans, regardless of their political and 
religious affiliation, economic and social status, or place of residence, need to demonstrate their 
commitment to the cause and contribute to needed reforms. At this point there is insufficient 
pressure from these groups and citizens, contributing to a lack of political will by the country’s 
leadership and key government institutions to fight corruption. While Zimbabwe is party to four 
regional and international conventions on combating corruption, and the local laws - including the 
Constitution, Prevention of Corruption Act, and the Criminal Code - provide a framework for the 
prevention, detection, and prosecution of corruption-related offenses, Zimbabwe’s failure to 
domesticate regional and international conventions, align its laws to and implement the 


Constitution, and effectively enforce existing corruption laws demonstrates a lack of political will 
to fight corruption. 

The current legal and policy institutional framework, while comprehensive, remains too weak to 
deal with both petty and grand corruption cases. For instance, poor remuneration of staff in public 
institutions make them susceptible to bribes. Grand corruption cases often fail because of poor 
case handling and the absence of whistleblower protection. The more complex cases that involve 
local, regional, and international networks facilitating resource accumulation through illicit 
activities across health, economic, humanitarian and governance sectors require a well-trained 
workforce, strong support mechanisms, and political will on the part of the government to solve 
and facilitate asset recovery. 

Zimbabwe’s informal economy brings in different sets of rules and challenges. Often these rules 
make it easy for both petty and grand corruption to be the norm rather than the exception. A 
closer look at the informal nature of activities across the humanitarian, economic, health, and 
democracy sectors show that Zimbabweans are building their own separate rules of engagement 
that seek to facilitate production and unlock livelihood opportunities. Unfortunately, the more the 
country entrenches itself in informality the more it will be difficult to build a culture that values 
integrity and shuns corruption. 

III. ACTIVITY DESCRIPTION 

 

Goal 

The activity’s goal is to build political will and a culture of integrity among Zimbabwean young 
people while strengthening the capacity of institutions to fight corruption. 

USAID has shared a working theory of change, but we invite Applicants to propose a theory of 
change that reflects the approach and methodology they will pursue. The proposed theory of 
change will be reviewed throughout the life of the project and, as appropriate, revised to reflect 
emerging learning about the most effective ways for USAID to support local systems and locally-
led change. Applicants must present a holistic project that addresses all the objectives described 
below and any attendant sub-objectives. 

Programmatic objectives and anticipated results detailed below have been intentionally drafted in 
a broad manner to leave room for the Applicants to present their own understanding of the 
problem and approaches for addressing it. Applicants are encouraged to submit innovative 
activities and creative ideas on how to advance the activity’s overall goal and its objectives. 
Applicants should include a description of how they will monitor the technical approach proposed 
and provide a list of notional results and indicators for each objective and sub-objective. The 
applicant should design an innovative subgrants program that explicitly contributes to 
achievement of the objectives and results outlined below. The subgranting component should also 
strengthen the technical capacities of subgrantees on programmatic anti-corruption issues as well 
as their organizational capacity for sustainability. 


Objectives and Anticipated Results 

Applicants will achieve the following objectives: 

Objective 1: Build knowledge, attitudes, and capacities of young people to shun corruption. 

In Zimbabwe, as in many other countries on the lower end of the Corruption Perception Index,4F5 
citizens are outraged by grand corruption, but there is little stigma associated with petty 
corruption designed to navigate bureaucratic processes. Many citizens perceive this type of 
corruption as facilitative and preferable to an overbearing bureaucracy. The aim of the objective is 
to raise awareness, influence behavior, and shift cultural norms on corruption. The economic 
meltdown has forced many young people to aspire to get rich quickly at the expense of integrity 
and hard work. This objective will strengthen the capacity of young people to serve as advocates 
of anti-corruption reforms and shun corruption in their everyday lives. It will also help to raise 
citizen expectations about the expected behavior of public and private entities usually implicated 
in corrupt activities. By focusing on the impacts of corruption on the lives of young people, 
women, and girls, the activity will build a body of knowledge on how corruption entrenches 
gender inequality and minimizes opportunities for youth advancement, which will be crucial for 
introspection and evidence-based advocacy by citizens to enable long-term change. 

5 Available at <https://www.transparency.org.uk/corruption-perceptions-index-2021-UK-
score?gclid=CjwKCAjwu_mSBhAYEiwA5BBmf2BmKIwlvNdu_-OWv4IXcdJ4jk94E_POdv95fSF4j7lAC-
XPMrvslRoCe1IQAvD_BwE> 

The activity should cultivate an attitude of rejecting corruption among Zimbabwean young people 
and of pressuring duty-bearers to avoid it. It will also ‘connect the dots’ linking the absence of 
economic opportunities and social services to corruption. Thus, it will work towards helping 
youth move away from the view that corruption is an immutable feature of the social and 
economic landscape in Zimbabwe. The activity will also support opportunities to positively 
impact gender knowledge, attitudes and practices in anti-corruption initiatives. Additionally, it 
will focus on how corruption undermines the quality and quantity of public services by reducing 
resources available and ultimately exacerbating social and gender disparities. Thus, Applicants 
should identify various tools to reach youth and women with messages that will help erode social 
tolerance of corruption. 

Anticipated results: 

● Youth knowledge and understanding of corruption and its costs increases; 
● Youth are able to use information gleaned from the media on corruption activities to hold 
leaders and their peers to account; and 



Objective 2: To build and strengthen the capacity of local institutions5F6 as agencies for 
reform and policy implementation. 

6 “Institutions” refers to both formal and informal entities that have interests in and/or power on or around corruption 
issues in a given community. Applicants are thus encouraged to be deliberate in their selection. 

This objective recognizes that a lot of the work around anti-corruption in Zimbabwe has and 
continues to focus on the national level; therefore, activities under this objective will identify, 
build, empower, and strengthen accountability mechanisms at the sub-national level. To this end, 
proposed interventions should identify innovative engagement platforms, actors, and institutions 
(including but not limited to universities, traditional leaders, local business associations, or faith-
based organizations) at the sub-national level to champion anti-corruption behavior change. 
Applicants should design interventions which take into account different local actors, traditions 
and customs; as well as the strengths and weaknesses of targeted institutions in a given locality to 
inform proposed interventions. Under this objective political economy analysis on local-level 
corruption networks will inform work planning and interventions. In undertaking the local-level 
analysis, Applicants are encouraged to connect corrupt activities at that level, their enablers, and 
bigger networks at the sub-national, national, and transnational levels. The nature and form of 
corruption at the sub-national level where this activity will seek to strengthen local accountability 
mechanisms and build coalitions against corruption is often informed by national and 
transnational opportunities and dynamics. 

Applicants should propose illustrative geographic focus areas as well as sub-national target 
institutions that would enable achievement of intended activity results. Area and institution 
proposals should be informed by political will to address corruption, level of community 
cohesion, nature of corruption in a given locality, significance of the institution in combating sub-
national-level corruption, and replicability and scalability, among other factors. Applications 
should justify proposed areas and institutions. USAID will work with the successful applicant to 
finalize selection and approval of geographic focus areas as well as target sub-national institutions 
after awarding during work planning. 

Anticipated results: 

● Build capacity of an institution (e.g. university) to conduct vulnerability-to-corruption 
assessments for public and private actors to better inform their programming; 
● CSOs conduct political economy analyses that trace and map out corruption networks and 
apply findings to their work planning; and 
● Private sector actors/associations at the sub-national level are able to build the capacity of 
members to identify, report, and/or hold their peers to account on any corrupt activity. 


 


Objective 3: Increase the efficacy of anti-corruption actors to identify, monitor, report, and 
engage in addressing corruption practices. 

This objective seeks to create an informed coalition of the willing, that openly discusses the 
consequences of corruption, appropriately proposes, and advocates for necessary reforms, and 
educates others on investments to change behavior as a way to reduce opportunities for 
corruption. This objective moves beyond the first and second objective in that it seeks to bring 
multiple actors to a position of acting and engaging with stakeholders at multiple levels. And, to 
make corruption an issue that brings together all Zimbabweans regardless of their political or 
religious affiliation or economic status, to pause and reflect on actions to reduce opportunities for 
corruption and to advocate for reforms. Interventions should propose creative ways that allow for 
multi-sectoral actors to identify, monitor, report and engage in addressing corrupt practices at the 
sub-national level. Through this objective, the activity will help to raise citizen expectations about 
the behavior of public officials and create incentives for more responsive and transparent 
institutions at the local level. The activity will employ a multi-stakeholder approach using 
traditional and non-traditional actors. Coalitions will be composed of broad sets of actors, to 
potentially include trade unions, the media, universities, faith-based organizations, networks, and 
the private sector. The applicant should develop anti-corruption initiatives focusing on the 
“demand” side i.e., citizens and related stakeholders who need to hold governments to account for 
their actions. 

Anticipated results: 

● Alliance of cross-sectoral actors fighting corruption identified and capacitated; 
● Citizens empowered to use the mechanisms available for citizen oversight of public and 
private entities implicated in corrupt activities; 
● Empowered citizens and civil society organizations to contribute to anti-corruption policy-
making processes; 
● Innovative tools and mechanisms on reporting corruption cases to relevant authorities 
developed; and 
● Local institutions and policies that hinder transparency and accountability reformed by 
proactive citizen engagement. 


 

IV. ACTIVITY PARAMETERS AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES 

Results under these objectives will be achieved through close, strategic collaboration with various 
local and international partners. The activity must be designed and implemented with the 
following guiding principles and tenets: 

Strategic alignment: In support of USAID/Zimbabwe’s CDCS, the proposed activity will 
contribute to the Mission’s IRs under DO3 (“Improved accountable, democratic governance that 
serves an engaged citizenry”) and the three DOs3 in the draft 2022-2027 CDCS. 

Evidence-based programming: To achieve the objectives, potential partners should use 
evidence-based programming to inform and strengthen the focus and results of the activity. Thus, 
where possible, the successful implementing partner should incorporate results from existing 
research before embarking on activities and consistently monitor and evaluate whether planned 
interventions are delivering the intended results, documenting decision-points throughout the life 


of the activity. This aspect is closely related to monitoring, evaluation, and learning described 
below. 

Local systems, local ownership and sustainability: Consistent with Program Cycle principles 
defined in ADS 201.3.1.2, the activity should strengthen local systems so that local actors 
continue to sustain key results after the activity ends. The activity should be designed to align 
with the priorities of local actors and communities in which anti-corruption activities are taking 
place. The successful Applicant will describe how the activity will engage with local systems. For 
more information on this approach, see Local Systems: A Framework for Supporting Sustained 
Development.6F7 Applicants, as is necessary and appropriate, should provide capacity strengthening 
- for themselves, for sub-partners - either directly or by drawing on other DG partners, as 
appropriate, to achieve programmatic results. 

7 Local Systems: A Framework for Supporting Sustained Development, available at 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1870/LocalSystemsFramework.pdf 

Gender integration: Promoting gender equality and advancing, in particular, the status of 
women and girls is vital to achieving USAID’s development objectives. It is USAID policy that 
all Applicants must integrate gender into their interventions. Therefore, the Applicant will be 
expected to demonstrate compliance with USAID ADS 205 and should explicitly state how this 
activity supports the gender policies and strategies of the United States and actuates the 
Zimbabwean Constitution. Successful Applicants will respond to the questions below to ensure 
gender integration is adequately incorporated in the activity. 

● How will the Applicant incorporate gender analysis at multiple stages of project 
implementation? 
● What activities are needed to ensure more equitable gender access and participation in the 
program? 
● How do the actions and decisions of institutions impact different genders? 


 

Proposed interventions should explicitly recognize gender in a substantive and integrated manner. 
The Applicant is expected to examine cultural perceptions, economic barriers, and other factors 
that affect women and men in terms of their influence as well as capacity to engage and act 
individually or collectively. Applicants should articulate how specific approaches will affect 
gender dynamics, how the program will capitalize on the unique contributions of women and men 
to protecting rights and all measures taken to assure equitable gender participation in the project. 

In addition, the Applicant must ensure that gender issues are suitably integrated into all 
components of the program. The Applicant will be required to undertake deliberate efforts to 
ensure that interventions under this program do not discriminate based on sex, age, 
ability/disability, gender identity, sexual orientation, or any other factor consistent with USAID 
regulation. To the extent possible, the Applicant is required to encourage the equal participation 
of men and women in all aspects of this activity. 

 


Inclusion and Diversity: Applicants must integrate an analysis of the barriers and opportunities 
for youth into programming and develop innovative ways to engage and empower young men and 
women. This will include ensuring that civil society organizations – and not just those focused on 
youth development – have the tools and the strategies necessary to employ and engage youth and 
ensure their ability to claim rights or have their voices heard. 

Promotion and respect of diversity and inclusion are key priorities for the Biden-Harris 
administration, including promoting and protecting the rights of persons with disabilities around 
the world. The activity will integrate people with disabilities (PWDs) in the design and 
implementation to ensure that the rights and needs of PWDs are proactively included at all levels. 
In implementing activities, USAID will encourage partners to include PWD not just as program 
participants but also as employees and stakeholders, and, where possible, meetings should be held 
at accessible venues and disability-friendly materials developed. 

The implementing partner must ensure intentional reach is achieved in other marginalized groups 
and communities, such as LGBTQI individuals or groups, ethnic or linguistic minorities, as well 
as communities usually not serviced by mainstream civil society organizations (CSOs). 

Cross-sectoral collaboration and partner selection: USAID/Zimbabwe’s country strategy 
framework elevates the importance of bringing an integrated lens to its development assistance, 
and the activity is anticipated to play an important role in identifying and pursuing synergies with 
other USAID/Zimbabwe and U.S. government programs. Such cross-sectoral linkages with 
Mission-supported accountability, anti-corruption and citizen engagement activities are needed to 
ensure complementarity and to avoid duplication. To leverage USAID investments and 
efficiencies, wherever feasible, the activity will also seek to collaborate with other 
USAID/Zimbabwe projects and/or areas where the Mission has significant investments. Where 
feasible, the activity will collaborate with the health, food security, and economic growth 
activities to identify programming opportunities to foster accountability in identified areas. 

V. COORDINATION WITH OTHER DONORS, IMPLEMENTERS AND 

STAKEHOLDERS 

 

Donors: USAID/Zimbabwe DG activities are complemented by funding and programming from 
other donors within the citizen engagement and accountability space. These include the European 
Commission (EC), Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, Germany, 
and Switzerland. The proposed approach should demonstrate awareness of, potential linkages to, 
and coordination plans with any ongoing donor initiatives. In particular, the EC and Sweden are 
directly engaged in anti-corruption work; this RFA has been designed with consideration of those 
activities, but applications must clearly articulate complementarity and plans to coordinate to 
maximize synergies and avoid duplication. 

USAID implementing partners: USAID expects the implementing partner to coordinate closely 
with other USAID-supported activities in Zimbabwe. Implementing partners will be expected to 
work together to identify and capitalize on synergies and to coordinate to avoid potential 
redundancies. The Mission and the DG Office convene periodic Chiefs of Party meetings to 
promote cross-partner and cross-sectoral collaboration and coordination in which the successful 
applicant should plan to participate, but partners are expected to seek, identify, and seize 


opportunities to leverage efforts apart from these convenings. As new programs come on-line, 
USAID may guide the implementing partner to collaborate with particular USAID programs. 

Stakeholder coordination: USAID/Zimbabwe expects Applicants to propose a list of potential 
stakeholders (these might include government institutions and non-governmental organizations) 
to engage under this activity. The selected implementing partner for this award will be expected, 
cognizant of extant US law and policy, to engage these and other key actors to explore potential 
opportunities for collaboration with them and other stakeholders/donors, leveraging and 
cooperating where appropriate and always avoiding duplication or wasteful redundancy. 

 

 

 

[END OF SECTION A] 

 


SECTION B: FEDERAL AWARD INFORMATION 

 

1. Estimate of Funds Available and Number of Awards Contemplated 


 

USAID intends to award one (1) Cooperative Agreement pursuant to this notice of funding 
opportunity. Subject to funding availability and at the discretion of the Agency, USAID intends 
to provide $12 million in total USAID funding over a five (5) year period. 

 

2. Start Date and Period of Performance for Federal Awards 


 

The anticipated period of performance is five (5) years. The estimated start date is October 1, 
2022 

 

3. Substantial Involvement 


 

USAID will be substantially involved in the implementation of the cooperative agreement 
awarded under this RFA. Such substantial involvement will include: 

● Approval of annual work plans and any amendments or changes thereto; 
● Approval of any subawards, both those proposed in the application and any that may arise 
during implementation of the activity; 
● Approval of partners staff proposed to fill Key Personnel positions; 
● Monitoring to permit specific kinds of direction or redirection of the work because of the 
interrelationships with other projects or activities; 
● Agency and recipient collaboration when the implementing partner’s successful 
accomplishment of program objectives would benefit from USAID’s technical knowledge; 
and 
● Collaborative involvement in selection of advisory committee members, should the 
program establish an advisory committee providing programmatic technical advice to the 
implementing partner. 


 

5. Authorized Geographic Code 

 

The geographic code for the procurement of commodities and services under this program is 935. 
This code includes any area or country including the recipient country, but excluding any country 
that is a prohibited source 

 

6. Nature of the Relationship between USAID and the Recipient 

 

The principal purpose of the relationship with the Recipient and under the subject program is to 
transfer funds to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation of the Young People for 
Integrity and Accountability (YPIA) activity which is authorized by Federal statute. The 
successful Recipient will be responsible for ensuring the achievement of the program objectives 
and the efficient and effective administration of the award through the application of sound 
management practices. The Recipient will assume responsibility for administering Federal funds 
in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program objectives, and the terms and 
conditions of the Federal award. 


7. Selection of Instrument 


 

The purpose of the Young People for Integrity and Accountability activity is to strengthen the 
capacity of young people and key institutions at the sub-national level to promote good 
governance and public integrity. Further, the activity's goal is to build political will and a culture 
of integrity among Zimbabwean youth while strengthening the capacity of institutions to fight 
corruption. The activity seeks to find innovative ways to empower citizens in general and young 
people in particular, to fight corruption; facilitate access to information; strengthen sub-national 
institutions and promote rule of law with the ultimate aim of reducing both grand and petty forms 
of corruption in Zimbabwe. 

 

Market research was conducted during the planning phase. The results showed that Zimbabwe has 
a number of local organizations whose mandate aligns with the activity objectives. In addition, 
various international organizations, including US organizations, have the capacity to implement 
the proposed activity working with local organizations. 

 

The Agency’s programmatic needs would be best met by providing funds to an organization to 
support its own project. Working with an organization or consortia whose mandate, experience 
and expertise align with the activity objectives increases the local ownership and sustainability of 
the intervention's results. This could also foster more collaborative partnerships between 
organizations. 

 

 

[END OF SECTION B] 

 


SECTION C: ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION 

 

1. Eligible Applicants 


 

Eligibility for this NOFO is not restricted. 

 

2. Cost Sharing or Matching 

 

There is no required cost share with this activity. 

 

3. Other 

 

Any one entity/organization may submit one (1) application for funding in response to this NOFO 
as a prime awardee. 

[END OF SECTION C] 


SECTION D: APPLICATION AND SUBMISSION INFORMATION 

 

1. Agency Point of Contact 


 

Name: Debra Nengomasha 

Title: Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

Email: dnengomasha@usaid.gov with copies to harareprocure@usaid.gov 

Alternate Point of Contact 

Name: Solomon Chang 

Title: Acquisition and Assistance Specialist 

Email:schang@usaid.gov 

 

2. Questions and Answers 


 

Questions regarding this NOFO should be submitted to dnengomasha@usaid.gov and 
harareprocure@usaid.gov no later than the date and time indicated on the cover letter, as 
amended. Any information given to a prospective applicant concerning this NOFO will be 
furnished promptly to all other prospective applicants as an amendment to this NOFO, if that 
information is necessary in submitting applications or if the lack of it would be prejudicial to any 
other prospective applicant. 

 

3. General Content and Form of Application 


Applicants are expected to review, understand, and comply with all aspects of the NOFO. 

Preparation of Applications: 

 

Each applicant must furnish the information required by this NOFO. Applications must be 
submitted in two separate parts: the Technical Application and the Business (Cost) Application. 
This subsection addresses general content requirements applying to the full application. Please 
see subsections 5 and 6, below, for information on the content specific to the Technical and 
Business (Cost) applications. The Technical application must address technical aspects only 
while the Business (Cost) Application must present the costs, and address risk and other related 
issues. 

 

Both the Technical and Business (Cost) Applications must include a cover page containing the 
following information: 

● Name of the organization(s) submitting the application. 
● Identification and signature of the primary contact person (by name, title, 
organization, mailing address, telephone number and email address) and the 
identification of the alternate contact person (by name, title, organization, mailing 
address, telephone number and email address). 
● Program name. 
● Notice of Funding Opportunity number. 



● Name of any proposed sub-recipients or partnerships (identify if any of the 
organizations are local organizations, per USAID’s definition of ‘local entity’ 
under ADS 303. 


 

Any erasures or other changes to the application must be initialed by the person signing the 
application. Applications signed by an agent on behalf of the applicant must be accompanied by 
evidence of that agent’s authority, unless that evidence has been previously furnished to the 
issuing office. 

 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the title page with the 
following legend: 

“This application includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the U.S. Government and shall 
not be duplicated, used, or disclosed – in whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate 
this application. If, however, a grant is awarded to this Applicant as a result of – or in connection 
with – the submission of this data, the U.S. Government shall have the right to duplicate, use, or 
disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting grant. This restriction does not limit the 
U.S. Government’s right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from another 
source without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet 
numbers} and, mark each sheet of data it wished to restrict with the following legend: 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page of 
this application.” 

Applicants should retain for their records one (1) copy of the application and all enclosures which 
accompany it. 

Applicants may choose to submit a cover letter in addition to the cover pages, but it will serve 
only as a transmittal letter to the Agreement Officer. The cover letter will not be reviewed as part 
of the merit review criteria. 

Applications must comply with the following: 

 

● USAID will not review any pages in excess of the page limits noted in the subsequent 
sections. Please ensure that applications comply with the page limitations. 
● Written in English 
● Use standard 8 ½” x 11”, single sided, single-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman font, 1” 
margins, left justification and headers and/or footers on each page including consecutive 
page numbers, date of submission, and applicant’s name. 
● 10 point font can be used for graphs and charts. Tables however, must comply with the 12 
point Times New Roman requirement. 



● Submitted via Microsoft Word or PDF formats, except budget files which must be 
submitted in Microsoft Excel. 
● The estimated start date identified in Section B of this NOFO must be used in the cost 
application. 
● The technical application must be a searchable and editable Word or PDF format as 
appropriate. 
● The Cost Schedule MUST include an Excel spreadsheet with all cells unlocked and no 
hidden formulas or sheets. A PDF version of the Excel spreadsheet may be submitted in 
addition to the Excel version at the applicant’s discretion, however, the official cost 
application submission is the unlocked Excel version. 
● The Cost schedule MUST be accompanied by a budget narrative in Word Format. 


 

Applicants must review, understand, and comply with all aspects of this NOFO. Failure to do so 
may be considered as being non-responsive and may be evaluated accordingly. Applicants should 
retain a copy of the application and all enclosures for their records. 

 

4. Application Submission Procedures 

Applications in response to this NOFO must be submitted no later than the closing date and time 
indicated on the cover letter, as amended. Late applications will not be reviewed nor considered. 

Applications must be submitted by email to dnengomasha@usaid.gov with a copy to 
harareprocure@usaid.gov. Email submissions must include the NOFO number and applicant’s 
name in the subject line heading. In addition, for an application sent by multiple emails, the 
subject line must also indicate whether the email relates to the technical or cost application, and 
the desired sequence of the emails and their attachments (e.g. "No. 1 of 4", etc.). For example, if 
your cost application is being sent in two emails, the first email should have a subject line that 
states: "[NOFO number], [organization name], Cost Application, Part 1 of 2". 

USAID’s preference is that the technical application and the cost application each be submitted as 
consolidated email attachments, e.g. that you consolidate the various parts of a technical 
application into a single document before sending it. If this is not possible, please provide 
instructions on how to collate the attachments. USAID will not be responsible for errors in 
compiling electronic applications if no instructions are provided or are unclear. 

After submitting an application electronically, applicants should immediately check their own 
email to confirm that the attachments were indeed sent. If an applicant discovers an error in 
transmission, please send the material again and note in the subject line of the email or indicate in 
the file name if submitted via grants.gov that it is a "corrected" submission. Do not send the same 
email more than once unless there has been a change, and if so, please note that it is a "corrected" 
email. 

Applicants are reminded that email is NOT instantaneous, and in some cases delays of several 
hours occur from transmission to receipt. Therefore, applicants are requested to send the 
application in sufficient time ahead of the deadline. For this NOFO, the initial point of entry to the 
government infrastructure is the USAID mail server. 


There may be a problem with the receipt of *.zip files due to anti-virus software. Therefore, 
applicants are discouraged from sending files in this format as USAID/Zimbabwe cannot 
guarantee their acceptance by the internet server. File size must not exceed 25MB. 

5. Technical Application Format 

The technical application should be specific, complete, and presented concisely. The application 
must demonstrate the applicant's capabilities and expertise with respect to achieving the goals of 
this program. The application should take into account the requirements of the program and merit 
review criteria found in this NOFO. 

It should be in English, Times New Roman, 12-point font, and at a minimum, must contain the 
following all of which count towards the 20-page limit (unless specified otherwise): 

Cover Page: (one page - does not count toward the 20-page limit) 

The cover page must include: 

● Name and address of organization(s)/institution(s) involved with the lead or primary 
applicant clearly identified. 

● Any proposed sub-grantees clearly listed. 

● The total estimated cost, the dollar amount requested from USAID. 

● Contact person (lead contact name, title, telephone numbers, and e-mail 
information). Applicants should also clearly state whether the identified contact 
person has the authority to negotiate on behalf of the applicant, and, if not, the 
contact information for the appropriate person with authority to negotiate should 
also be listed. 

Table of Contents: (not to exceed one page - does not count toward the page limit) 

Acronym List: (not included in page limitation). 

Executive Summary: (maximum one page) 

The Executive Summary must provide a high-level overview of key elements of the Technical 
Application. 

Technical Application: (20 pages maximum, including Executive Summary) 

Applicants must organize the narrative sections of their technical applications in the same order as 
the evaluation criteria and include the major components below. 

1. Technical Approach 

The Technical and Implementation Approach is the most important part of the proposed 
activity. This section should provide a clear overall vision and operational strategy to 
achieve the expected results of the activity. It should include the applicant’s analysis of the 
important challenges, priority needs, and key activities. 


 

Applicants are required to propose a comprehensive approach to achieve the activity’s results and 
ensure that interventions are sustainable. A high level of coordination with other USG-funded 
awards and other development partners must be demonstrated. Deliberate avoidance of 
duplication and redundancies in assistance must be documented in the application. 

Applicants have flexibility to propose their own solutions to the program components that will 
achieve the anticipated results, which are described under Section III of the Program Description 
and should guide applicants in preparing their applications. The applicant should design an 
innovative subgrants program to achieve the activity objectives and provide the required technical 
assistance to enable the selected subgrantees to successfully implement activities. USAID 
encourages applicants to propose innovative approaches to create incentives for program success 
and sustainability. 

The applicant will be evaluated not only on how it meets the expected results but on progress 
towards ensuring sustainability as well. Special consideration will be given to innovative 
alliances. The applicant is expected to develop all assistance activities with the guiding principles 
and programmatic considerations in mind which are stated under Section IV of the Program 
Description. A draft first six- or twelve-month workplan should demonstrate the Applicant’s 
vision, approach, results, and sustainability plan. 

2. Key Personnel and Management Approach 

The Applicant should provide an overview of the proposed key personnel, their qualifications and 
experience requirements, and, as appropriate, relevant curriculum vitae and references. This 
includes the rationale and appropriateness of key personnel, the division of labor between in-
country and home office personnel in the event the applicant is or proposes to partner with an 
organization(s) based outside of Zimbabwe, and the division of responsibilities and authorities 
between prime and sub-partners. This section should also include how the applicant will organize 
its staff, including subpartners, to achieve the goals and objectives of the RFA while properly and 
responsibly managing USAID funds. Proposed award management plans, including 
organizational charts with roles and reporting lines, are encouraged. 

3. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan 

Applicants are encouraged to propose in their MEL plan a set of benchmarks to be achieved 
against a set of qualitative and quantitative indicators. It is expected that all indicators, when 
practical, be disaggregated by gender and that specific attention be paid to strategies for better 
including women and girls as direct program beneficiaries. Knowledge of data management 
systems may be included in the Applicant’s submission when discussing the tracking of 
information. 

4. Past performance and Experience 

Applicants should provide evidence, including past performance references for similar 
procurements, that the applicant and any proposed subpartners have the ability to successfully 


carry out a project comparable in scope and complexity to the RFA. USAID/Zimbabwe will 
incorporate organizational experience in the evaluation criteria 

6. Business (Cost) Application Format 

 

The Business (Cost) Application must be submitted separately from the Technical Application. 
While no page limit exists for the full cost application, applicants are encouraged to be as concise 
as possible while still providing the necessary details. The business (cost) application must 
illustrate the entire period of performance, using the budget format shown in the SF-424A. 

 

Prior to award, applicants may be required to submit additional documentation deemed necessary 
for the Agreement Officer to assess the applicant’s risk in accordance with 2 CFR 200.206. 
Applicants should not submit any additional information with their initial application. 

 

The Cost Application must contain the following sections (which are further elaborated below this 
listing with the letters for each requirement): 

 

a) Cover Page (See Section D.3 above for requirements) 














 

b) SF 424 Form(s) 














 

The applicant must sign and submit the cost application using the SF-424 series. Standard Forms 
can be accessed electronically at www.grants.gov or using the following links: 

 

Instructions for SF-
424 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424-
instructions.html 

Application for 
Federal Assistance 
(SF-424) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424A 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424a-
instructions.html 

Budget Information 
(SF-424A) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 

Instructions for SF-
424B 

http://www.grants.gov/web/grants/form-instructions/sf-424b-
instructions.html 

Assurances (SF-424B) 

https://www.grants.gov/web/grants/forms/sf-424-family.html 



 

Failure to accurately complete these forms could result in the rejection of the application. 

 

c) Required Certifications and Assurances 














 

The applicant must complete the following documents and submit a signed copy with their 
application: 

 


(1) “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and Other Statements of the 
Recipient” ADS 303mav document found at 
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1868/303mav.pdf 
(2) Assurances for Non-Construction Programs (SF-424B) 
(3) Certificate of Compliance: Please submit a copy of your Certificate of Compliance if 
your organization's systems have been certified by USAID/Washington's Office of 
Acquisition and Assistance (M/OAA). 


 

d) Budget and Budget Narrative 














 

The Budget must be submitted as one unprotected Excel file (MS Office 2000 or later versions) 
with visible formulas and references and must be broken out by project year, including 
itemization of the federal and non-federal (cost share) amount. Files must not contain any hidden 
or otherwise inaccessible cells. Budgets with hidden cells lengthen the cost analysis time required 
to make award, and may result in a rejection of the cost application. 

 

The Budget Narrative MUST be a separate Word document that contains sufficient detail to allow 
USAID to understand the proposed costs. The applicant must ensure the budgeted costs address 
any additional requirements identified in Section F, such as Branding and Marking. The Budget 
Narrative must be thorough, including sources for costs to support USAID’s determination that 
the proposed costs are fair and reasonable. 

 

The Budget must include the following worksheets or tabs, and contents, at a minimum: 

 

● Summary Budget, inclusive of all program costs (federal and non-federal), broken out by 
major budget category and by year for activities implemented by the applicant and any 
potential sub-applicants for the entire period of the program. See Annex 1 for Summary 
Budget Template 
● Detailed Budget, including a breakdown by year, sufficient to allow the Agency to 
determine that the costs represent a realistic and efficient use of funding to implement the 
applicant’s program and are allowable in accordance with the cost principles found in 2 
CFR 200 Subpart E. 
● Detailed Budgets for each sub-recipient, for all federal funding, broken out by budget 
category and by year, for the entire implementation period of the project. 


 

The Detailed Budget must contain the following budget categories and information, at a 
minimum: 

 

1) Salaries and Allowances – Must be proposed consistent with 2 CFR 200.430 Compensation - 
Personal Services. The applicant’s budget must include position title, salary rate, level of 
effort, and salary escalation factors for each position. Allowances, when proposed, must be 
broken down by specific type and by position. Applicants must explain all assumptions in the 
Budget Narrative. The Budget Narrative must demonstrate that the proposed compensation is 
reasonable for the services rendered and consistent with what is paid for similar work in other 
activities of the applicant. Applicants must provide their established written policies on 
personnel compensation. If the applicant’s written policies do not address a specific element 



of compensation that is being proposed, the Budget Narrative must describe the rationale used 
and supporting market research. 


 

2) Fringe Benefits – (if applicable) If the applicant has a fringe benefit rate approved by an 
agency of the U.S. Government, the applicant must use such rate and provide evidence of its 
approval. If an applicant does not have a fringe benefit rate approved, the applicant must 
propose a rate and explain how the applicant determined the rate. In this case, the Budget 
Narrative must include a detailed breakdown of all items of fringe benefits (e.g., 
superannuation, gratuity, etc.) and the costs of each, expressed in U.S. dollars and as a 
percentage of salaries. 


 

3) Travel and Transportation – Provide details to explain the purpose of the trips, the number of 
trips, the origin and destination, the number of individuals traveling, and the duration of the 
trips. Per Diem and associated travel costs must be based on the applicant’s normal travel 
policies. When appropriate please provide supporting documentation as an attachment, such 
as company travel policy, and explain assumptions in the Budget Narrative. 


 

4) Procurement or Rental of Goods (Equipment & Supplies), Services, and Real Property – Must 
include information on estimated types of equipment, models, supplies and the cost per unit 
and quantity. The Budget Narrative must include the purpose of the equipment and supplies 
and the basis for the estimates. The Budget Narrative must support the necessity of any rental 
costs and reasonableness in light of such factors as: rental costs of comparable property, if 
any; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, 
condition, and value of the property leased. 


 

5) Subawards – Specify the budget for the portion of the program to be passed through to any 
subrecipients. See 2 CFR 200 for assistance in determining whether the sub-tier entity is a 
subrecipient or contractor. The subrecipient budgets must align with the same requirements 
as the applicant’s budget, including those related to fringe and indirect costs. 


 

6) Construction – If applicable 


 

7) Other Direct Costs – This may include other costs not elsewhere specified, such as report 
preparation costs, passports and visas fees, medical exams and inoculations, as well as any 
other miscellaneous costs which directly benefit the program proposed by the applicant. The 
applicant should indicate the subject, venue and duration of any proposed conferences and 
seminars, and their relationship to the objectives of the program, along with estimates of costs. 
Otherwise, the narrative should be minimal. 


 

8) Indirect Costs – Applicants must indicate whether they are proposing indirect costs or will 
charge all costs directly. In order to better understand indirect costs please see Subpart E of 2 
CFR 200. The application must identify which approach they are requesting and provide the 
applicable supporting information. 

 

 

 


e) Prior Approvals in accordance with 2 CFR 200.407 














 

Inclusion of an item of cost in the detailed application budget does not satisfy any requirements 
for prior approval by the Agency. If the applicant would like the award to reflect approval of any 
cost elements for which prior written approval is specifically required for allowability, the 
applicant must specify and justify that cost. See 2 CFR 200.407 for information regarding which 
cost elements require prior written approval. 

 

f) Approval of Subawards 

 

The applicant must submit information for all subawards that it wishes to have approved at the 
time of award. For each proposed subaward the applicant must provide the following: 

 

● Name of organization 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not appear on the Treasury Department’s Office 
of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient does not have active exclusions in the System for 
Award Management (SAM) 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not listed in the United Nations Security designation 
list 
● Confirmation that the subrecipient is not suspended or debarred 
● Confirmation that the applicant has completed a risk assessment of the subrecipient, in 
accordance with 2 CFR 200.332(b) 
● Any negative findings as a result of the risk assessment and the applicant’s plan for 
mitigation. 


 

g) SAM Requirements 

 

USAID may not award to an applicant unless the applicant has complied with all System for 
Award Management (SAM) requirements. Each applicant (unless the applicant is an individual 
or Federal awarding agency that is exempted from requirements under 2 CFR 25.110(b) or (c), or 
has an exception approved by the Federal awarding agency under 2 CFR 25.110(d)) is required 
to: 

 

1. Be registered in SAM before submitting its application. SAM is streamlining processes, 
eliminating the need to enter the same data multiple times, and consolidating hosting to make 
the process of doing business with the government more efficient (www.beta.sam.gov). 
2. Continue to maintain an active SAM registration with current information at all times during 
which it has an active Federal award or an application or plan under consideration by a 
Federal awarding agency. 


 

The registration process may take many weeks to complete. Therefore, applicants are encouraged 
to begin the process early. If an applicant has not fully complied with the requirements above by 
the time USAID is ready to make an award, USAID may determine that the applicant is not 
qualified to receive an award and use that determination as a basis for making an award to another 
applicant. 


SAM registration: http://www.beta.sam.gov 

 

Non-U.S. applicants can find additional resources for registering in SAM, including a Quick Start 
Guide and a video on how to obtain an NCAGE code, on www.beta.sam.gov, navigate to Help, 
then to International Registrants. 

 

h) History of Performance 

 

Past Performance and Experience - This section will address the following: 

● Brief description of the applicant’s organizational history and experience 
● Examples of accomplishments and results in developing and implementing similar 
programs; 
● Relevant experience with proposed approaches; 
● Institutional strength as represented by breadth and depth of experienced personnel in 
program relevant disciplines and areas; and 
● Explanation of how lessons learned will be applied in achieving the goals of the program. 


 

The applicant must provide information regarding its recent history of performance for all its 
cost-reimbursement contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements involving similar or related 
programs, not to exceed three (3) years, as follows: 

● Name of the Awarding Organization; 
● Award Number; 
● Activity Title; 
● A brief description of the activity; 
● Period of Performance; 
● Award Amount; 
● Reports and findings from any audits performed in the last three (3)years; and 
● Name of at least two (2) updated professional contacts who most directly observed the 
work at the organization for which the service was performed with complete current 
contact information including telephone number, and e-mail address for each proposed 
individual. 


 

If the applicant encountered problems on any of the referenced Awards, it may provide a short 
explanation and the corrective action taken. The applicant should not provide general information 
on its performance. USAID reserves the right to obtain relevant information concerning an 
applicant’s history of performance from any sources and may consider such information in its 
review of the applicant’s risk. The Agency may request additional information and conduct a pre-
award survey if it determines that it is necessary to inform the risk assessment. 

 

i) Branding Strategy & Marking Plan 

 

The apparently successful applicant will be asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking 
Plan to be evaluated and approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated when the award is 
signed. 

 

 


j) Funding Restrictions 

 

Profit is not allowable for recipients or subrecipients under this award. See 2 CFR 200.331 for 
assistance in determining whether a sub-tier entity is a subrecipient or contractor. 

 

Construction will not be authorized under this award. 

 

USAID will not allow the reimbursement of pre-award costs under this award without the explicit 
written approval of the Agreement Officer. 

 

Except as may be specifically approved in advance by the AO, all commodities and services that 
will be reimbursed by USAID under this award must be from the authorized geographic code 
specified in Section B.5 of this NOFO and must meet the source and nationality requirements set 
forth in 22 CFR 228. 

 

k) Conscience Clause 

 

This NOFO will not obligate HIV/AIDS funds. 

 

l) Conflict of Interest Pre-Award Term (August 2018) 

 

a. Personal Conflict of Interest 

1. An actual or appearance of a conflict of interest exists when an applicant organization 
or an employee of the organization has a relationship with an 8 Agency official involved 
in the competitive award decision-making process that could affect that Agency official’s 
impartiality. The term “conflict of interest” includes situations in which financial or other 
personal considerations may compromise, or have the appearance of compromising, the 
obligations and duties of a USAID employee or recipient employee. 

 

2. The applicant must provide conflict of interest disclosures when it submits an SF-424. 
Should the applicant discover a previously undisclosed conflict of interest after submitting 
the application, the applicant must disclose the conflict of interest to the AO no later than 
ten (10) calendar days following discovery. 

 

b. Organizational Conflict of Interest 

 

The applicant must notify USAID of any actual or potential conflict of interest that they are aware 
of that may provide the applicant with an unfair competitive advantage in competing for this 
financial assistance award. Examples of an unfair competitive advantage include but are not 
limited to situations in which an applicant or the applicant’s employee gained access to non-
public information regarding a federal assistance funding opportunity, or an applicant or 
applicant’s employee was substantially involved in the preparation of a federal assistance funding 
opportunity. USAID will promptly take appropriate action upon receiving any such notification 
from the applicant. 

 

[END OF SECTION D] 


SECTION E: APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 

 

1. Evaluation criteria and scoring: 

 

Technical applications will be evaluated against the criteria below. Technical Approach is most 
important. Key Personnel and Management Approach, Monitoring and Evaluation Approach, and 
Organizational Experience will be equally weighted. The Cost Application will not be scored. 

● Technical Approach 
● Key Personnel & Management Approach 
● Organizational Experience 
● Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 


 

Criteria #1: Technical Approach 

The overall quality and sustainability of the technical approach and how likely it is to achieve the 
proposed results/outcomes and to contribute to the objective(s) for this program description and 
USAID/Zimbabwe’s strategy. 

Criteria #2: Key Personnel and Management Approach 

The quality of the management approach and extent to which it proposes an efficient 
organizational architecture that will effectively implement the activity. This includes the 
quality and appropriateness of the proposed key personnel, the division of labor between in-
country and home office personnel in the event the applicant is or proposes to partner with 
an organization(s) based outside of Zimbabwe, and the division of responsibilities and 
authorities between prime and sub-partners. 

Criteria #3: Organizational Experience 

As per ADS 303.3.9, “[a]n applicant’s [past] performance can serve as an indicator of the 
quality of its future performance.” Thus, USAID will evaluate the extent to which the 
applicant’s Past Performance reflects the quality of the applicant’s work on relevant present 
or past projects of similar scope, magnitude of effort, timeliness of performance, cost 
control, effectiveness of key personnel, and complexity. 

 

An Applicant’s performance will not be evaluated favorably or unfavorably when: 

• The applicant lacks relevant performance history, 
• Information on performance is not available, or 
• The applicant is a member of a class of applicants where there is provision not to 
rate the class against a sub factor. 


 

Criteria #4: Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan 

The Applicant should provide an overview of the proposed Monitoring and Evaluation 
Strategy and draft Monitoring and Evaluation Plan for the activity. The draft MEL plan 
table itself should be included as an annex. Indicators and annual targets in the MEL plan 
should directly relate to the technical assistance and support to be provided. 

 

 


2.Review and Selection Process 

 

The required format and content for the application are described in Section D. The applications 
will be evaluated using an adjectival rating system, in accordance with the selection criteria set 
forth below, by a Selection Committee (SC) comprised of USAID employees, other U.S. 
Government representatives, and/or host country experts. The SC will make a recommendation 
regarding which applicant should receive the award. 

 

Prior to negotiating an actual award, the Agreement Officer will review the apparently successful 
applicant’s budget to ensure that costs are in compliance with OMB’s and USAID’s policies. The 
costs proposed must be determined to be reasonable, based on the Cost Application and other 
information before award can be made. 

 

Award will be made to the responsible applicant whose application is determined to be the best 
based on the criteria specified in this NOFO. The Agreement Officer must also evaluate the risk 
of the apparently successful applicant and is charged with the final determination of whether to 
make an award to the apparently successful applicant. Among other issues, the apparently 
successful applicant’s history of performance will be reviewed using the reference information 
contained in the Technical Application, along with any other information deemed relevant by the 
Agreement Officer or Selection Committee. 

 

The Agreement Officer is the only individual who may legally obligate the U.S. Government to 
the expenditure of public funds. No costs chargeable to the proposed Agreement may be incurred 
before receipt of either an Agreement signed by the Agreement Officer or a specific, written 
authorization form the Agreement Officer. 

 

3. Business Review 

 

The Agency will evaluate the cost application of the applicant(s) under consideration for an award 
as a result of the merit criteria review to determine whether the costs are allowable in accordance 
with the cost principles found in 2 CFR 200 Subpart E. 

 

The Agency will also consider (1) the extent of the applicant's understanding of the financial 
aspects of the program and the applicant's ability to perform the activities within the amount 
requested; (2) whether the applicant's plans will achieve the program objectives with reasonable 
economy and efficiency; and (3) whether any special conditions relating to costs should be 
included in the award. 

 

The AO will perform a risk assessment (2 CFR 200.206). The AO may determine that a pre-
award survey is required to inform the risk assessment in determining whether the prospective 
recipient has the necessary organizational, experience, accounting and operational controls, 
financial resources, and technical skills – or ability to obtain them – in order to achieve the 
objectives of the program and comply with the terms and conditions of the award. Depending on 
the result of the risk assessment, the AO will decide to execute the award, not execute the award, 
or award with “specific conditions” (2 CFR 200.208). 

[END OF SECTION E] 


SECTION F: FEDERAL AWARD ADMINISTRATION INFORMATION 

 

1. Federal Award Notices 


 

Award of the agreement contemplated by this NOFO cannot be made until funds have been 
appropriated, allocated and committed through internal USAID procedures. While USAID 
anticipates that these procedures will be successfully completed, potential applicants are hereby 
notified of these requirements and conditions for the award. 

 

2. Administrative & National Policy Requirements 


 

The resulting award from this NOFO will be administered in accordance with the following 
policies and regulations. 

 

For US organizations: ADS 303, 2 CFR 700, 2 CFR 200, and Standard Provisions for U.S. Non-
governmental organizations. 

 

For non-US organizations: Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non-governmental Organizations. 

 

See Annex 2, for a list of the Standard Provisions that will be applicable to any awards resulting 
from this NOFO. 

 

3. Reporting Requirements 


 

The Recipient shall be subject to the following reporting requirements: 

 

● Financial Reporting: 


 

As permitted by 2 CFR 200.327, the Recipient must submit quarterly financial reports to USAID 
within 30 calendar days following the end of each quarter utilizing the Office of Management and 
Budget SF-425. Financial reports are due January 31, April 30, July 31, and October 31. The SF-
425 (and SF-42Sa, if necessary) must be submitted via electronic format to the Agreement 
Officer's Representative (AOR), the Agreement Officer (AO), and the USAID Office of Financial 
Management. The Federal Financial Report (FFR/SF-425) is available in PDF or Excel format at 
the following OMB website: https://www.usaid.gov/forms/sf-425 

 

● Performance Reporting 


 

i) The following reports are required: 

a. Annual Work/Implementation Plans 

b. MEL Plan 

c. Quarterly success 

d. Semi-Annual and Annual Performance Reports 

e. Branding and Marking Plan 

f. Final Report 

g. Close-Out Plan 


 

a. Annual Work Plans: The Recipient is expected to submit a draft first year 
workplan with the application and subsequent annual work plans 30 days before the 
beginning of the annual reporting period, which aligns with the USG fiscal year, for 
approval by USAID’s Agreement Officer’s Representative (AOR). Work plans and 
changes and/or revisions thereto shall describe the activities to be conducted during 
the period at a greater level of detail than the Program Description but shall not serve 
to change the Program Description. All work plans and changes/revisions thereto 
shall cross-reference the applicable section(s) in the Program Description. 
Workplans will include, among others, programmatic targets, results metrics, context 
indicators, performance indicators (standard, custom (qualitative and quantitative), 
and key assumptions, to be jointly agreed in consultation with the USAID AOR. 
Periodic reviews will provide regular check-in points to review progress, reflect on 
changes in the context, and decide on appropriate programmatic adjustments. 
Depending upon operational circumstances, some components of the Program 
Description may not be activated through the work plan or may be activated through 
incremental work plan revisions. 

 

b. Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Plan: The MEL plan must 
include how the applicant will learn during implementation and describe how it 
intends to adapt its management and implementation approaches based on its learning 
platform. Within 30 days of award, the Recipient will submit a draft MEL plan to the 
AOR. The MEL plan shall cover the full period of this Cooperative Agreement and 
include the process for collecting and analyzing baseline data. USAID will review the 
draft MEL plan and provide comments/suggestions within 30 days of receipt. The 
Recipient will then submit one copy of the final MEL plan to the AOR for approval 
in writing not later than 15 days from receipt of USAID's comments/suggestions. The 
MEL plan will include specific benchmarks and indicators for measuring progress for 
all activities that are ongoing, including DO-related Performance Monitoring Plan 
and Performance Plan & Report indicators specified in the PD and 
USAID/Zimbabwe’s performance management plan along with additional 
benchmarks and indicators developed by the Recipient. The MEL plan will also 
highlight how data collected will show the impact and effectiveness of program 
approaches and methodologies employed and how the data will contribute toward 
enhancing understanding of best practices in the sector. The MEL plan should show 
feedback loops that allow the program to use monitoring and evaluation information 
for decision making within the program. Measurement will focus on both output and 
outcome data as well as on higher levels of impact to demonstrate the effects and 
results of program activities. For each objective, there should be at least two to three 
qualitative outcome-oriented indicators. All data should be disaggregated by sex, 
disability, age, and geography, whenever applicable. 

 

The MEL Plan will be updated and revised as necessary annually in conjunction with 
the Annual Implementation/Work Plan, most specifically related to annual indicator 
targets. 


c. Quarterly success stories: The successful applicant will submit at least 
one story of general interest (or success story) every three months, including 
data that demonstrates the impact of programming on individuals and 
institutions in Zimbabwe. These may be submitted at any time during the 
three-month period. 

Each story will be no longer that two pages and will include a photo and where 
appropriate, informed consent regarding use of the photo. Priority should be 
given to stories which demonstrate how gender gaps, and/or the unique needs 
and interests of males and females, have been addressed. 

d. Semi-Annual Performance Reports: The Recipient will submit semi-annual 
performance reports within 30 days of the close of the reporting period. These reports 
will indicate progress achieved towards benchmarks, highlight tangible results, 
identify any problems encountered in implementation, and propose remedial actions 
as appropriate. In addition to meeting the performance reporting requirements, these 
cumulative reports must include data collected to measure progress against the M&E 
plan and the documentation of "success stories". Reports will be submitted 
electronically to the AOR and the Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC); 
submission instructions can be found at http://dec.usaid.gov. The reports must be 
reviewed and cleared by the AOR prior to submission to the DEC. 

e. Branding and Marking Plan: The apparently successful applicant will be 
asked to provide a Branding Strategy and Marking Plan to be evaluated and 
approved by the Agreement Officer and incorporated when the award is signed. 

f. Final Report: No later than 45 days after the completion date of the 
Agreement, the Recipient must prepare a completion report which highlights 
accomplishments against work plans, gives the final status of the benchmarks and 
objectives, addresses lessons learned during implementation, and suggests ways to 
resolve identified constraints. This is in line with requirements as set in 22 CFR 
226.51. The report should provide recommendations for follow-on work that might 
complement the completed work and details of close-out and transition plans. The 
Recipient shall submit an electronic version as well as two copies of the final report 
to the AO and AOR. One additional copy of the report must be sent to the 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC); submission instructions can be 
found at http://dec.usaid.gov. Final Report must be reviewed and cleared by the AOR 
prior to submitting to DEC. 

 

g. Close-Out Plan: Three months prior to the completion date of the Agreement, 
the Recipient will submit a demobilization plan for AOR's approval. The Close-out 
Plan will include, at a minimum, an illustrative property disposition plan, a plan for 
the phase-out of in-country operations, a delivery schedule for all reports or other 
documents requested and a timetable for completing all required actions in the Close-
out Plan, including the submission date of the final property disposition plan to the 
Agreement Officer. 


4. Environmental Compliance 


 

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, Section 117 requires that the impact of 
USAID’s activities on the environment be considered and that USAID includes 
environmental sustainability as a central consideration in designing and carrying out its 
development programs. 

 

This mandate is codified in Federal Regulations (22 CFR 216) and in USAID’s Automated 
Directives System (ADS) 204, which require, in part, that the potential environmental 
impacts of USAID-financed activities are identified prior to a final decision to proceed and 
that appropriate environmental safeguards are adopted for all activities. No activity funded 
under this Cooperative Agreement will be implemented unless an environmental threshold 
determination, as defined by 22 CFR 216, has been reached for that activity, as documented 
in an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), or Environmental Assessment (EA) duly 
signed by the Bureau Environmental Officer (BEO). Hereinafter, such documents are 
described as “approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation.” 

 

The activity environmental compliance obligations under these regulations are specified in 
the IEE http://gemini.info.usaid.gov/repository/pdf/39281.pdf posted on the USAID 
Environmental compliance database http://gemini.info.usaid.gov/. The applicant shall be 
responsible for implementing all IEE conditions pertaining to activities to be funded under 
this solicitation. 

1) In addition, the Recipient must comply with host country environmental 
regulations unless otherwise directed in writing by USAID. In case of conflict 
between host country and USAID regulations, the latter shall govern. 


 

As part of its initial Work Plan, and Annual Work Plans thereafter, the Recipient, in 
collaboration with the USAID Agreement Officer’s Representative and Mission 
Environmental Officer or Bureau Environmental Officer, as appropriate, shall review all 
ongoing and planned activities under this Cooperative Agreement to determine if they are 
within the scope of the approved Regulation 216 environmental documentation 

 

 

[END OF SECTION F] 

 


SECTION G: FEDERAL AWARDING AGENCY CONTACT(S) 

 

1. NOFO Points of Contact 

 

Any questions regarding this NFO may be addressed 
to: 

 

Debra Nengomasha 

Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 
Email: dnengomasha@usaid.gov 

 

With a copy to: harareprocure@usaid.gov. 

 

Alternate Point of Contact: 

Solomon Chang 

Acquisition & Assistance Specialist 

Email: schang@usaid.gov 

 

The Agreement Officer for this award is: 

Zeb Simpson 
Email: jsimpson@usaid.gov 

The Financial Office for this award is: 

 

Financial Management Office USAID/Zimbabwe 

No. 2 Lorraine Drive, Westgate 

Harare, Zimbabwe 

Email: harareinvoice@usaid.gov 

 

2. Acquisition and Assistance Ombudsman 

 

The A&A Ombudsman helps ensure equitable treatment of all parties who participate in USAID’s 
acquisition and assistance process. The A&A Ombudsman serves as a resource for all 
organizations who are doing or wish to do business with USAID. Please visit this page for 
additional information: https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/acquisition-assistance-ombudsman 

 
The A&A Ombudsman may be contacted via: Ombudsman@usaid.gov 

 

[END OF SECTION G] 

 

 


SECTION H: OTHER INFORMATION 

 

USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted. The Agreement 
Officer is the only individual who may legally commit the Government to the expenditure of 
public funds. Any award and subsequent incremental funding will be subject to the availability of 
funds and continued relevance to Agency programming. 

 

Applications with Proprietary Data 

 

Applicants who include data that they do not want disclosed to the public for any purpose or used 
by the U.S. Government except for evaluation purpose, should mark the cover page with the 
following: 

 

“This application includes data that must not be disclosed, duplicated, used, or disclosed – in 
whole or in part – for any purpose other than to evaluate this application. If, however, an award 
is made as a result of – or in connection with – the submission of this data, the U.S. 
Government will have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in 
the resulting award. This restriction does not limit the U.S. Government’s right to use 
information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The 
data subject to this restriction are contained in sheets {insert sheet numbers}.” 

 

Additionally, the applicant must mark each sheet of data it wishes to restrict with the following: 

 

“Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to the restriction on the title page 
of this application.” 

 

 

[END OF SECTION H] 

 

 


ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY BUDGET TEMPLATE 

 

Attached. 

 

 

[END OF ANNEX 1] 


ANNEX 2 - STANDARD PROVISIONS 

 

(Note: the full text of these provisions may be found at: 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303maa and 
https://www.usaid.gov/ads/policy/300/303mab). The actual Standard Provisions included in the 
award will be dependent on the organization that is selected. The award will include the latest 
Mandatory Provisions for either U.S. or non-U.S. Nongovernmental organizations. The award 
will also contain “required as applicable” Standard Provisions: 

 

Please note that the resulting award will include all standard provisions (both mandatory 
and required as applicable) in full text. 

 

 

 

[END OF ANNEX 2] 

 

 


ANNEX 3 - ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

 

 

ADS Automated Directives System 

AO Agreement Officer 

AOR Agreement Officer's Representative 

CDCS Country Development Cooperation Strategy 

COP Chief Of Party 

CSO Civil Society Organizations 

EC European Commission 

FAA Foreign Assistance Act 

GOZ Government of Zimbabwe 

IR Intermediate Result 

JSI Justice Systems and Institutions 

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 

MEL Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Plan 

NOFO Notice of Funding Opportunity 

PWDs People with Disabilities 

RFA Request for Application 

SAM System for Award Management 

TA Technical Assistance 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

YPIA Young People for Integrity and Accountability 

USG United States Government 

ZACC Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission 

 

 

 

[END OF ANNEX 3] 

 

 

 

 


